<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_1">1</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 1"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 1</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">DECAY.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross stood on the traders’ ramp, overlooking the Yards,
and the word kept bobbing to the top of his mind.</p>

<p class="c007">Decay.</p>

<p class="c007">About all of Halsey’s Planet there was the imperceptible
reek of decay. The clean, big, bustling, efficient spaceport
only made the sensation stronger. From where he stood on
the height of the Ramp, he could see the Yards, the spires
of Halsey City ten kilometers away—and the tumble-down
gray acres of Ghost Town between.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross wrinkled his nose. He wasn’t a man given to brooding,
but the scent of decay had saturated his nostrils that
morning. He had tossed and turned all the night, wrestling
with a decision. And he had got up early, so early that the
only thing that made sense was to walk to work.</p>

<p class="c007">And that meant walking through Ghost Town. He hadn’t
done that in a long time, not since childhood. Ghost Town
was a wonderful place to play. “Tag,” “Follow My Fuehrer,”
“Senators and President”—all the ancient games took
on new life when you could dodge and turn among crumbling
ruins, dart down unmarked lanes, gallop through sagging
shacks where you might stir out a screeching, unexpected
recluse.</p>

<p class="c007">But it was clear that—in the fifteen years between childhood
games and a troubled man’s walk to work—Ghost
Town had grown.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_2">2</span>Everybody knew that! Ask the right specialists, and
they’d tell you how much and how fast. An acre a year, a
street a month, a block a week, the specialists would twinkle
at you, convinced that the acre, street, block was under
control, since they could measure it.</p>

<p class="c007">Ask the right specialists and they would tell you why it
was happening. One answer per specialist, with an ironclad
guarantee that there would be no overlapping of replies.
“A purely psychological phenomenon, Mr. Ross. A
vibration of the pendulum toward greater municipal compactness,
a huddling, a mature recognition of the facts of
interdependence, basically a step forward....”</p>

<p class="c007">“A purely biological phenomenon, Mr. Ross. Falling
birth rate due to biochemical deficiency of trace elements
processed out of our planetary diet. Fortunately the situation
has been recognized in time and my bill before the
Chamber will provide....”</p>

<p class="c007">“A purely technological problem, Mr. Ross. Maintenance
of a sprawling city is inevitably less efficient than that
of a compact unit. Inevitably there has been a drift back to
the central areas and the convenience of air-conditioned
walkways, winterized plazas....”</p>

<p class="c007">Yes. It was a purely psychological-biological-technological-educational-demographic
problem, and it was basically
a step forward.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross wondered how many Ghost Towns lay corpselike
on the surface of Halsey’s Planet. Decay, he thought. Decay.</p>

<p class="c007">But it had nothing to do with his problem, the problem
that had kept him awake all the night, the problem that
blighted the view before him now.</p>

<p class="c007">The trading bell clanged. The day’s work began.</p>

<p class="c007">For Ross it might be his last day’s work at the Yards.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">He walked slowly from the ramp to the offices of the
Oldham Trading Corporation. “Morning, Ross boy,” his
breezy young boss greeted him. Charles Oldham IV’s father
had always taken a paternal attitude toward his help, and
Charles Oldham IV was not going to change anything that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_3">3</span>Daddy had done. He shook Ross’s hand at the door of the
suite and apologized because they hadn’t been able to find
a new secretary for him yet. They’d been looking for two
weeks, but the three applicants they had been able to
dredge up had all been hopeless. “It’s the damn Chamber,”
said Charles Oldham IV, winsomely gesturing with his
hands to show how helpless men of affairs were against
the blundering interference of Government. “Damn labor
shortage is nothing but a damn artificial scarcity crisis.
Daddy saw it; he knew it was coming.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross almost told him he was quitting, but held back.
Maybe it was because he didn’t want to spoil Oldham’s
day with bad news, right on top of the opening bell. Or
maybe it was because, in spite of a sleepless night, he still
wasn’t quite sure.</p>

<p class="c007">The morning’s work helped him to become sure. It was
the same monotonous grind.</p>

<p class="c007">Three freighters had arrived at dawn from Halsey’s third
moon, but none of them was any affair of his. There was an
export shipment of jewelry and watches to be attended to,
but the ship was not to take off for another week. It
scarcely classified as urgent. Ross worked on the manifests
for a couple of hours, stared through his window for an
hour, and then it was time for lunch.</p>

<p class="c007">Little Marconi hailed him as he passed through the traders’
lounge.</p>

<p class="c007">Of all the juniors on the Exchange, Marconi was the one
Ross found easiest to take. He was lean and dark where
Ross was solid and fair; worse, he stood four ranks above
Ross in seniority. But, since Ross worked for Oldham, and
Marconi worked for Haarland’s, the difference could be
waived in social intercourse.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross suspected that, to Marconi as to him, trading was
only a job—a dull one, and not a crusade. And he knew
that Marconi’s reading was not confined to bills of lading.
“Lunch?” asked Marconi. “Sure,” Ross said. And he knew
he’d probably spill his secret to the little man from Haarland’s.</p>

<p class="c007">The skyroom was crowded—comparatively. All eight of
the usual tables were taken; they pushed on into the roped-off
<span class="pageno" id="Page_4">4</span>area by the windows and found a table overlooking the
Yards. Marconi blew dust off his chair. “Been a long time
since this was used,” he grumbled. “Drink?” He raised his
eyebrows when Ross nodded. It made a break; Marconi
was the one usually who had a drink with lunch, Ross never
touched it.</p>

<p class="c007">When the drinks came, each of them said to the other in
perfect synchronism: “I’ve got something to tell you.”</p>

<p class="c007">They looked startled—then laughed. “Go ahead,” said
Ross.</p>

<p class="c007">The little man didn’t even argue. Rapturously he drew
a photo out of his pocket.</p>

<p class="c007">God, thought Ross wearily, Lurline again! He studied
the picture with a show of interest. “New snap?” he asked
brightly. “Lovely girl——” Then he noticed the inscription:
<i>To my fiance, with crates of love.</i> “Well!” he said,
“Fiance, is it? Congratulations, Marconi!”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi was almost drooling on the photo. “Next
month,” he said happily. “A big, big wedding. For keeps,
Ross—for keeps. With children!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross made an expression of polite surprise. “You don’t
say!” he said.</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s all down in black and white! She agrees to have two
children in the first five years—no permissive clause, a
straight guarantee. Fifteen hundred annual allowance per
child. And, Ross, do you know what? Her lawyer told her
right in front of me that she ought to ask for three thousand,
and she told him, ‘No, Mr. Turek. I happen to be in
love.’ How do you like that, Ross?”</p>

<p class="c007">“A girl in a million,” Ross said feebly. His private
thoughts were that Marconi had been gaffed and netted
like a sugar perch. Lurline was of the Old Landowners,
who didn’t own anything much but land these days, and
Marconi was an undersized nobody who happened to make
a very good living. Sure she happened to be in love. Smartest
thing she could be. Of course, promising to have children
sounded pretty special; but the papers were full of
those things every day. Marconi could reliably be counted
on to hang himself. He’d promise her breakfast in bed every
third week end, or the maid that he couldn’t possibly find
<span class="pageno" id="Page_5">5</span>on the labor market, and the courts would throw all the
promises on both sides out of the contract as a matter of
simple equity. But the marriage would stick, all right.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi had himself a final moist, fatuous sigh and returned
the photo to his pocket. “And now,” he asked
brightly, craning his neck for the waiter, “what’s your
news?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross sipped his drink, staring out at the nuzzling freighters
in their hemispherical slips. He said abruptly, “I might
be on one of those next week. Fallon’s got a purser’s berth
open.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi forgot the waiter and gaped. “Quitting?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I’ve got to do something!” Ross exploded. His own
voice scared him; there was a knife blade of hysteria in the
sound of it. He gripped the edge of the table and forced
himself to be calm and deliberate.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi said tardily, “Easy, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Easy! You’ve said it, Marconi: ‘Easy.’ Everything’s so
damned easy and so damned boring that I’m just about
ready to blow! I’ve got to do something,” he repeated. “I’m
getting nowhere! I push papers around and then I push
them back again. You know what happens next. You get
soft and paunchy. You find yourself going by the book
instead of by your head. You’re covered, if you go by the
book—no matter what happens. And you might just as
well be dead!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Now, Ross——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Now, hell!” Ross flared. “Marconi, I swear I think
there’s something wrong with me! Look, take Ghost Town
for instance. Ever wonder why nobody lives there, except
a couple of crazy old hermits?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Why, it’s Ghost Town,” Marconi explained. “It’s deserted.”</p>

<p class="c007">“And why is it deserted? What happened to the people
who used to live there?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi shook his head. “You need a vacation, son,” he
said sympathetically. “That was a long time ago. Hundreds
of years, maybe.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But where did the people go?” Ross persisted desperately.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_6">6</span>“All of the city was inhabited hundreds of years ago—the
city was twice as big as it is now. How come?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi shrugged. “Dunno.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross collapsed. “Don’t know. You don’t know, I don’t
know, nobody knows. Only thing is, I care! I’m curious.
Marconi, I get—well, moody. Depressed. I get to worrying
about crazy things. Ghost Town, for one. And why can’t
they find a secretary for me? And am I really different from
everybody else or do I just think so—and doesn’t that
mean that I’m insane?”</p>

<p class="c007">He laughed. Marconi said warmly, “Ross, you aren’t the
only one; don’t ever think you are. I went through it myself.
Found the answer, too. You wait, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">He paused. Ross said suspiciously, “Yeah?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi tapped the breast pocket with the photo of Lurline.
“She’ll come along,” he said.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross managed not to sneer in his face. “No,” he said
wearily. “Look, I don’t advertise it, but I was married once.
I was eighteen, it lasted for a year and I’m the one who
walked out. Flat-fee settlement; it took me five years to
pay off the loan, but I never regretted it.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi began gravely, “Sexual incompatibility——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross cut him off with an impatient gesture. “In that department,”
he said, “it so happens she was a genius.
But——”</p>

<p class="c007">“But?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross shrugged. “I must have been crazy,” he said shortly.
“I kept thinking that she was half-dead, dying on the
vine like the rest of Halsey’s Planet. And I must still be
crazy, because I still think so.”</p>

<p class="c007">The little man involuntarily felt his breast pocket. He
said gently, “Maybe you’ve been working too hard.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Too hard!” Ross laughed, a curious blend of true
humor and self-disgust. “Well,” he admitted, “I need a
change, anyhow. I might as well be on a longliner. At least
I’d have my spree to look back on.”</p>

<p class="c007">“No!” Marconi said, so violently that Ross slopped the
drink he was lifting to his mouth.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked hard at the little man—hard and speculatively.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_7">7</span>“No, then,” he said. “It was just a figure of speech,
of course. But tell me something, won’t you, Marconi?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Tell you what?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Tell me why such a violent reaction to the word ‘longliner.’
I want to know.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Hell, Ross,” the little man grumbled, “you know what
a longliner is. Gutter-scrapings for crews; nothing for a
man like you.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I want to know more,” Ross insisted. “When I ask you
what a longliner is, what the crew do with themselves for
two or three centuries, you change the subject. You always
change the subject! Maybe you know something I don’t
know. I want to know what it is, and this time the subject
doesn’t get changed. You don’t get off the hook until I find
out.” He took a sip of his drink and leaned back. “Tell me
about longliners,” he said. “I’ve never seen one coming in;
it’s been fifteen years or so since that bucket from Sirius
IV, hasn’t it? But you were on the job then.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi was no longer a man in love or one of the few
people whom Ross considered to be wholly alive—like
him. He was a hard-eyed little stranger with a stubborn
mouth and an ingratiating veneer. In short he was again a
trader, and a good one.</p>

<p class="c007">“I’ll tell you anything I know,” Marconi declared positively,
and insincerely. “Tend to that fellow first though,
will you?” He pointed to a uniformed Yards messenger
whose eye had just alighted on Ross. The man threaded
his way, stumbling, through the tables and laid a sealed
envelope down in the puddle left by Ross’s drink.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sorry, sir,” he said crisply, wiped off the envelope with
his handkerchief and, for lagniappe, wiped the puddle off
the table into Ross’s lap.</p>

<p class="c007">Speechless, Ross signed for the envelope on a red-tabbed
slip marked URGENT * PRIORITY * RUSH. The messenger
saluted, almost putting his own eye out, and left,
crashing into tables and chairs.</p>

<p class="c007">“Half-dead,” Ross muttered, following him with his
eyes. “How the devil do they stay alive at all?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi said, unsmiling, “You’re taking this kick pretty
seriously, Ross. I admit he’s a little clumsy, but——”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_8">8</span>“But nothing,” said Ross. “Don’t try to tell me you don’t
know something’s wrong, Marconi! He’s a bumbling incompetent,
and half his generation is just like him.” He
looked bitterly at the envelope and dropped it on the table
again. “More manifests,” he said. “I swear I’ll start throwing
tableware if I have to check another bill of lading.
Brighten my day, Marconi; tell me about the longliners.
You’re not off the hook yet, you know.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi signaled for another drink. “All right,” he said.
“Marconi tells all about longliners. They’re ships. They go
from the planet of one star to the planet of another star. It
takes a long time, because stars are many light-years apart
and rocket ships cannot travel as fast as light. Einstein said
so—whoever he was. Do we start with the Sirius IV ship?
I was around when it came in, all right. Fifteen years ago,
and Halsey’s Planet is still enjoying the benefits of it. And
so is Leverett and Sons Trading Corporation. They did
fine on flowers from seeds that bucket brought, they did
fine on sugar perch from eggs that bucket brought. I’ve
never had it myself. Raw fish for dessert! But some people
swear by it—at five shields a portion. They can have it.”</p>

<p class="c007">“The hook, Marconi,” Ross reminded grimly.</p>

<p class="c007">Trader Marconi laughed amiably. “Sorry. Well, what
else? Pictures and music, but I’m not much on them. I do
read, though, and as a reader I say, God bless that bucket
from Sirius IV. We never had a novelist like Morris Halliday
on this planet—or an essayist like Jay Waring. Let’s
see, there have been eight Halliday novels off the microfilms
so far, and I think Leverett still has a couple in the
vaults. Leverett must be——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Marconi. I don’t want to hear about Leverett and Sons.
Or Morris Halliday, or Waring. I want to hear about longliners.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I’m trying to tell you,” Marconi said sullenly, the mask
down.</p>

<p class="c007">“No, you’re not. You’re telling me that the longline ships
go from one stellar system to another with merchandise. I
know that.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Then what do you want?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Don’t be difficult, Marconi. I want to know the facts.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_9">9</span>All about longliners. The big hush-hush. The candid explanations
that explain nothing—except that a starship is
a starship. I know that they’re closed-system, multigeneration
jobs; a group of people get in on Sirius IV and their
great-great-great-great-grandchildren come giggling and
stumbling out on Halsey’s Planet. I know that every couple
of generations your firm—and mine, for that matter—builds
one with profits that would be taxed off anyway and
slings it out, stocked with seeds and film and sound tape
and patent designs and manufacturing specifications for
every new gimmick on the market, in the hope that it’ll be
back long after we’re dead with a similar cargo to enrich
your firm’s and my firm’s then-current owners. Sounds silly—but,
as I say, it’s tax money anyhow. I know that your
firm and mine staff the ships with half a dozen bums of
each sex, who are loaded aboard with a dandy case of
delirium tremens, contracted from spending their bounty
money the only way they know how. And that’s just about
all I know. Take it from there, Marconi. And be specific.”</p>

<p class="c007">The little man shrugged irritably. “That gag’s beginning
to wear thin, Ross,” he complained. “What do you want
me to tell you—the number of welds in Bulkhead 47 of
‘Starship 74’? What’s the difference? As you said, a starship
is a starship is a longliner. Without them the inhabited
solar systems would have no means of contact or commerce.
What else is there to say?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked suddenly lost. “I—don’t know,” he said.
“Don’t you know, Marconi?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi hesitated, and for a moment Ross was sure he
did know—knew something, at any rate, something that
might be an answer to the doubts and nagging inconsistencies
that were bothering him. But then Marconi shrugged
and looked at his watch and ordered another drink.</p>

<p class="c007">But there was something wrong. Ross felt himself in the
position of a diagnostician whose patient willfully refuses
to tell where it hurts. The planet was sick—but wouldn’t
admit it. Sick? Dying! Maybe he was on the wrong track
entirely. Maybe the starships had nothing to do with it.
Maybe there was nothing that Marconi knew that would fit
a piece into the puzzle and make the answer come out all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_10">10</span>clear—but Ghost Town continued to grow acre by acre,
year by year. And Oldham still hadn’t found him a secretary
capable of writing her own name.</p>

<p class="c007">“According to the historians, everything fits nicely into
place,” Ross said, dubiously. “They say we came here ourselves
in longliners once, Marconi. Our ancestors under
some man named Halsey colonized this place, fourteen
hundred years ago. According to the longliners that come
in from other stars, their ancestors colonized wherever they
came from in starships from a place called Earth. Where
is this Earth, Marconi?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi said succinctly, “Look in the star charts. It’s
there.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, but——”</p>

<p class="c007">“But, hell,” Marconi said in annoyance. “What in the
world has got into you, Ross? Earth is a planet like any
other planet. The starship Halsey colonized in was a starship
like any other starship—only bigger. I guess, that is—I
wasn’t there. After all, what are the longliners but colonists?
They happen to be going to planets that are already
inhabited, that’s all. So a starship is nothing new or even
very interesting, and this is beginning to bore me, and you
ought to read your urgent-priority-rush message.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross felt repentant—knowing that that was just how
Trader Marconi wanted him to feel. He said slowly, “I’m
sorry if I’m being a nuisance, Marconi. You know how it
is when you feel stale and restless. I know all the stories—but
it’s so damned hard to believe them. The famous colonizing
ships. They must have been absolutely gigantic to
take any reasonable number of people on a closed-circuit,
multigeneration ride. We can’t build them that big now!”</p>

<p class="c007">“No reason to.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But we couldn’t if we had to. Imagine shooting those
things all over the Galaxy. How many inhabited planets in
the charts—five hundred? A thousand? Think of the technology,
Marconi. What became of it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“We don’t need that sort of technology any more,” Marconi
explained. “That job is done. Now we concentrate on
more important things. Learning to live with each other.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_11">11</span>Developing our own planet. Increasing our understanding
of social factors and demographic——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross was laughing at last. “Well, Marconi,” he said at
last, “that takes care of that! We sure have figured out how
to handle the social factors, all right. Every year there are
fewer of them to handle. Pretty soon we’ll all be dead, and
then the problem can be marked ‘solved.’”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi laughed too—eagerly, as if he’d been waiting
for the chance. He said, “Now that that’s settled, are you
going to open your message? Are you at least going to have
some lunch?”</p>

<p class="c007">The Yards messenger stumbled up to their table again,
this time with an envelope for Marconi. He looked sharply
at Ross’s unopened envelope and said nothing, pointedly.
Ross guiltily picked it up and tore it open. You could act
like a sulky child in front of a friend, but strangers didn’t
understand.</p>

<p class="c007">The message was from his office. RADAR REPORTS
HIGH VELOCITY SPACECRAFT ON AUTOCONTROLS.
FIRST APPROXIMATION TRAJECTORY
INDICATES INTERSTELLAR ORIGIN. PROBABLE
ETA YARDS 1500. NO RADIO MESSAGES RECEIVED.
DON’T HAVE TO TELL YOU TO GET ON
THIS IMMEDIATELY AND GIVE IT YOUR BEST.
OLDHAM.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked at Marconi, whose expression was perturbed.
“Bet I know what your message says,” he offered
with an uneasy quaver in his voice.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi said: “I’ll bet you do. Oldham’s radar setup on
Sunward always has been better than Haarland’s. Better
location. Man, you are in trouble! Let’s get out there and
hope nobody’s missed you so far.”</p>

<p class="c007">They grabbed sandwiches from the snack bar on the way
out and munched them while the Yards jeep took them to
the ready line. Skirting the freighters in their pits, slipping
past the enormous overhaul sheds, they saw excited debates
going on. Twice they were passed by Yards vehicles heading
toward the landing area. Halfway to the line they heard
the recall sirens warning everybody and everything out of
the ten seared acres surrounded by homing and Ground-Controlled
<span class="pageno" id="Page_12">12</span>Approach radars. That was where the big ones
were landed.</p>

<p class="c007">The ready line was jammed when they got there. Ships
from one or another of the five moons that circled Halsey’s
planet were common; the moons were the mines. Even the
weekly liner and freighters from the colony on Sunward,
the planet next in from Halsey’s, were routine to the Yards
workers. But to anybody an interstellar ship was a sensation,
a once-or-twice-in-a-lifetime thrill.</p>

<p class="c007">Protocols were uncertain. Traders argued about the first
crack at the strangers and their goods. A dealer named
Aalborg said the only fair system would be to give every
trade there an equal opportunity to do business—in alphabetical
order. Everybody agreed that under no circumstances
should the man from Leverett and Sons be allowed
to trade—everybody, except the man from Leverett and
Sons. He pointed out that his firm was the logical choice
because it had more and fresher experience in handling
interstellar goods than any other....</p>

<p class="c007">They almost mobbed him.</p>

<p class="c007">It wasn’t merely money that filled the atmosphere with
electric tingles. The glamor of time-travel was on them.
The crew aboard that ship were travelers of time as well as
space. The crew that had launched the ship was dust. The
crew that served it now had never seen a planet.</p>

<p class="c007">There was even some humility in the crowd. There were
thoughtful ones among them who reflected that it was not,
after all, a very great feat to hitch a rocket to a shell and
lob it across a few million miles to a neighboring planet. It
was eclipsed by the tremendous deed whose climax they
were about to witness. The thoughtful ones shrugged and
sighed as they thought that even the starship booming
down toward Halsey’s Planet—fitted with the cleverest
air replenishers and the most miraculously efficient waste
converters—was only a counter in the game whose great
rule was the mass-energy formulation of the legendary Einstein:
that there is no way to push a material object past
the speed of light.</p>

<p class="c007">A report swept the field that left men reeling in its wake.
Radar Track confirmed that the ship was of unfamiliar pattern.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_13">13</span>All hope that it might be a starship launched from
this very spot on the last leg of a stupefying round trip was
officially dead. The starship was foreign.</p>

<p class="c007">“Wonder what they have?” Marconi muttered.</p>

<p class="c007">“Trader!” Ross sneered ponderously. He was feeling
better; the weight of depression had been lifted for the
time being, either by his confession or the electric atmosphere.
If every day were like this, he thought vaguely....</p>

<p class="c007">“Let’s not kid each other,” Marconi was saying exuberantly.
“This is an event, man! Where are they from, what
are they peddling? Do I get a good cut at their wares? It
could be fifty thousand shields for me in commission alone.
Lurline and I could build a tower house on Great Blue
Lake with that kind of money, with a whole floor for her
parents! Ross, you just don’t know what it is to really be
in love. Everything changes.”</p>

<p class="c007">A jeep roared up and slammed to a stop; Ross blinked
and yelled: “Here it comes!”</p>

<p class="c007">They watched the ground-controlled approach with the
interest of semiprofessionals and concealed their rising excitement
with shop talk.</p>

<p class="c007">“Whups! There goes the high-power job into action.”
Marconi pointed as a huge dish antenna swiveled ponderously
on its mast. “Seems the medium-output dishes can’t
handle her.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Maybe the high-power dish can’t either. She might be
just plain shot.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Standard, sealed GCA doesn’t get shot, my young
friend. Not in a neon-atmosphere tank it doesn’t.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Maybe along about the fifth generation they forgot
what it was and cut it open with an acetylene torch to see
what was inside.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Bad luck for us in that case, Ross.” The ship steadied
on a due-west course and flashed across the heavens and
over the horizon.</p>

<p class="c007">“Somebody decided a braking ellipse or two was in
order. What about line of sight?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No sweat. The GCA jockey—and I’d bet it’s Delafield
himself—pushes a button that hooks him into the high-power
dish at every rocket field on Halsey’s. It’s been all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_14">14</span>thought out. There’s a potential fortune aboard that longliner
and Fields Administration wants its percentage for
servicing and accommodating.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Wonder what they have?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I already asked that one, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">“So you did.”</p>

<p class="c007">They lapsed into silence until the rocket boomed in
again from the east, high and slow. The big dish swiveled
abruptly and began tracking again.</p>

<p class="c007">“He’ll try to bring her down this time. Yes! There go fore
and stabilizing jets.”</p>

<p class="c007">Flame jutted from the silvery speck high in the blue; its
apparent speed slowed to a crawl. It vanished for a second
as steering jets turned her slowly endwise. They caught
sight of the stern jets when they blasted for the descent.</p>

<p class="c007">It was uneventful—just the landing of a very, very big
rocket. When a landing is successful it is like every other
successful landing ever made.</p>

<p class="c007">But the action that the field whirled into immediately
following the landing was far from routine. The bullhorns
roared that all traders, wipers, rubbernecks, and visitors
were to get behind the ready lines and stay there. All Class-Three-and-higher
Field personnel were to take stations for
longliner clearance. The weapons and decontamination
parties were to take their stations immediately. Captain
Delafield would issue all future orders and don’t let any of
the traders talk you out of it, men. Captain Delafield would
issue all future orders.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross watched in considerable surprise as Field men
working with drilled precision broke out half a dozen sleek,
needle-nosed guns from an innocent-looking bay of the
warehouse and manhandled them into position. From another
bay a large pressure tank was hauled and backed
against the lock of the starship. Ross could see the station
medic bustlingly supervise that, and the hosing of white
gunk onto the juncture between tank and ship.</p>

<p class="c007">Delafield crossed the stretch from the GCA complex to
the tank, vanished into it through a pressure-fitted door and
that was that. The tank had no windows.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said to Marconi, wonderingly: “What’s all this
<span class="pageno" id="Page_15">15</span>about? There was Doc Gibbons handling the pressure tank,
there was Chunk Blaney rolling out a God-damned cannon
I never knew was there—how many more little secrets are
there that I don’t know about?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi grinned. “They have gun drill once a month,
my young friend, and they never say a word about it. Let
the right rabble-rouser get hold of the story and he might
sail into office on a platform of ‘Keep the bug-eyed monsters
off of Halsey’s Planet.’ You have to have reasonable
precautions, military and medical, though—and this is the
straight goods—there’s never been any trouble of either
variety.”</p>

<p class="c007">The conversation died and there was a long, boring hour
of nothing. At last Delafield appeared again. One of the
decontamination party ran up in a jeep with a microphone.</p>

<p class="c007">“What’ll it be?” Ross demanded. “Alphabetic order? Or
just a rush?”</p>

<p class="c007">The announcement floored him. “Representative of the
Haarland Trading Corporation please report to the decontamination
tank.”</p>

<p class="c007">The representative of the Haarland Trading Corporation
was Marconi.</p>

<p class="c007">“Hell,” Ross said bitterly. “Good luck with them, whoever
they are.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi brooded for a moment and then said gruffly,
“Come on along.”</p>

<p class="c007">“You mean it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure. Uh—naturally, Ross, you’ll give me your word
not to make any commercial offers or inquiries without my
permission.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh. Naturally.” They started across the field and were
checked through the ready line, Marconi cheerfully presenting
his identification and vouching for Ross.</p>

<p class="c007">Captain Delafield, at the tank, snapped, “What are you
doing here, Ross? You’re Oldham’s man. I distinctly
said——”</p>

<p class="c007">“My responsibility, Captain. Will that do it?” Marconi
asked.</p>

<p class="c007">Delafield snapped, “It’ll be your fundament if Haarland
<span class="pageno" id="Page_16">16</span>hears about it. Actually it’s the damnedest situation—they
<i>asked</i> for Haarland’s.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi looked frightened and his hand involuntarily
went to his breast pocket. He swallowed and asked,
“Where are they from?”</p>

<p class="c007">Delafield grimaced and said, “Home.”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi exploded, “Oh, no!”</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s all I can get out of them. I suppose their trajectory
can be analyzed, and there must be books. We haven’t
been in the ship yet. Nobody goes in until it gets sprayed,
rayed, dusted, and busted down into its component parts.
Too many places for nasty little mutant bacteria and
viruses to lurk.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, Captain. ‘Home,’ eh? They’re pretty simple?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Happy little morons. Fifteen of them, ranging in age
from one month to what looks like a hundred and twenty.
All they know is ‘home’ and ‘we wish to see the representative
of the Haarland Trading Corporation.’ First the old
woman said it. Then the next in line—he must be about a
hundred—said it. Then a pair of identical twins, fifty-year-old
women, said it in chorus. Then the rest of them on
down to the month-old baby, and I swear to God he tried
to say it. Well, you’re the Haarland Trading Corporation.
Go on in.”</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_17">17</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 2"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 2</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THEY were all naked. Why not? There’s
no weather in a space ship. All of them laughed when Ross
and Marconi came in through the lock except the baby,
who was nursing at the breast of a handsome woman. Their
laughter was what attracted Ross immediately. Cheerful—no
meanness in it. The happy yelping of puppies at play
with a red rubber bone.</p>

<p class="c007">A stab went through him as the pleasure in their simple
happiness turned to recollection and recognition. His wife
of a decade ago.... Ross studied them with amazement,
expecting to find her features in their features, her figure in
theirs. And failed. Yet they reminded him inescapably of
his miserable year with that half-a-woman, but they were
physically no kin of hers. They were just cheerful laughers
who he knew were less than human.</p>

<p class="c007">The cheerful laughers exposed unblemished teeth in all
their mouths, including that of the hundred-and-twenty-year-old
matriarch. Why not? If you put calcium and
fluorides into a closed system, they stay there.</p>

<p class="c007">The old woman stopped laughing at them long enough
to say to Marconi, “We wish to see the representative of
the Haarland——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, I know. I’m the representative of the Haarland
Trading Corporation. Welcome to Halsey’s Planet. May I
ask what your name is, ma’am?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_18">18</span>“Ma,” she said genially.</p>

<p class="c007">“Pleased to meet you, Ma. My name’s Marconi.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ma said, bewildered, “You just said you were the representative
of the Haarland Trading——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, Ma, but that’s all right. Let’s say that’s my other
name. Two names—understand?”</p>

<p class="c007">She laughed at the idea of two names, wonderingly.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi pressed, “And what’s the name of this gentleman?”</p>

<p class="c007">“He isn’t Gentleman. He’s Sonny.”</p>

<p class="c007">Sonny was a hundred years old.</p>

<p class="c007">“Pleased to meet you, Sonny. And your name, sir?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sonny,” said a redheaded man of eighty or thereabouts.</p>

<p class="c007">The identical-twin women were named The Kids. The
baby was named Him. The rest of the troop were named
Girl, Ma, or Sonny. After introductions Ross noticed that
Him had been passed to another Ma who was placidly
suckling him. She had milk; it dribbled from the corner of
the baby’s mouth. “There isn’t another baby left in the ship,
is there?” Ross asked in alarm.</p>

<p class="c007">They laughed and the Ma suckling the baby said: “There
was, but she died. Mostly they do when you put them into
the box after they get born. Ma here was lucky. Her Him
didn’t die.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Put them in the box? What box? Why?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi was nudging him fiercely in the ribs. He ignored
it.</p>

<p class="c007">They laughed amiably at his ignorance and explained
that the box was the box, and that you put your newborn
babies into it because you put your newborn babies into it.</p>

<p class="c007">A beep tone sounded from the ship.</p>

<p class="c007">Ma said, “We have to go back now, The Representative
of the Haarland Trading Corporation Marconi.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What for?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ma said, “At regular intervals signaled by a tone of six
hundred cycles and an intermittent downward shifting of
the ship lights from standard illumination frequency to a
signal frequency of 420 millimicrons, ship’s operating personnel
take up positions at the control boards for recalibration
<span class="pageno" id="Page_19">19</span>of ship-working meters and instruments against the
battery of standard masters. We’ll be right back.”</p>

<p class="c007">They trooped through the hatch, leaving Ross and Marconi
staring at each other in the decontamination tank.</p>

<p class="c007">“Well,” Ross said slowly, “at last I know why the Longliner
Departments have their little secrets. ‘The box.’ I say
it’s murder.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Be reasonable,” Marconi told him—but his own face
was white under the glaring germicidal lamps. “You can’t
let them increase without limit or they’d all die. And before
they died there’d be cannibalism. Which do you prefer?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Letting kids be born and then snuffing them out if a
computer decides they’re the wrong sex or over the quota
is inhuman.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I didn’t say I like it, Ross. But it works.”</p>

<p class="c007">“So do pills!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Pills are a private matter. A person might privately decide
not to take hers. The box is a public matter and the
group outnumbers and overrules a mother who decides not
to use it. There’s your question of effectiveness answered,
but there’s another point. Those people are sane, Ross.
Preposterously naive, but sane! Saner than childless women
or sour old bachelors we both know who never had to love
anything small and helpless, and so come to love nobody
but themselves. They’re sane. Partly because the women
get a periodic biochemical shakeup called pregnancy that
their biochemical balance is designed to mesh with. Partly
because the men find tenderness and protectiveness in
themselves toward the pregnant women. Mostly, I think,
because—it’s something to do.</p>

<p class="c007">“Can you imagine the awful monotony of life in the ship?
The work is sheer rote and repetition. They can’t read or
watch screentapes. They were born in the ship, and the
books and screentapes are meaningless because they know
nothing to compare them with. The only change they see is
each other, aging toward death. Frequent pregnancies are
a Godsend to them. They compare and discuss them; they
wonder who the fathers are; they make bets of rations; the
men brag and keep score. The girls look forward to their
first and their last. The jokes they make up about them!
<span class="pageno" id="Page_20">20</span>The way they speculate about twins! The purgative fear,
even, keeps them sane.”</p>

<p class="c007">“And then,” Ross said, “‘the box.’”</p>

<p class="c007">Staring straight ahead at the ship’s port Marconi echoed:
“Yes. ‘The box.’ If there were another way—but there
isn’t.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">His breezy young boss, Charles Oldham IV, was not
pleased with what Ross had to report.</p>

<p class="c007">“Asked for Haarland!” he repeated unbelievingly.
“Those dummies didn’t know where they were going or
where they were from, but they knew enough to ask for
Haarland.” He slammed a ruler on his desk and yelled:
“God-damn it!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Mr. Oldham!” Ross protested, aghast. For a superior
to lose his temper publicly was unthinkable; it covered you
with embarrassment.</p>

<p class="c007">“Manners be God-damned too!” Oldham screamed,
breaking up fast. “What do you know about the state of
our books? What do you know about the overhead I inherited
from my loving father? What the hell do you know
about the downcurve in sales?”</p>

<p class="c007">“These fluctuations——” Ross began soothingly.</p>

<p class="c007">“Fluctuations be God-damned! I know a fluctuation
when I see one, and I know a long-term downtrend when I
see one. And that’s what we’re riding, right into bankruptcy,
fellow. And now these God-damned dummies blow
in from nowhere with a consignment exclusively for Haarland—I
don’t know why I don’t get to hell out of this
stupid business and go live in a shack on Great Blue Lake
and let the planet go ahead and rot.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s horror at the unseemly outburst was eclipsed by
his interest at noting how similarly he and Oldham had
been thinking. “Sir,” he ventured, “I’ve had something on
my mind for a while——”</p>

<p class="c007">“It can wait,” Oldham growled, collecting himself with
a visible effort. So there went his chance to resign. “What
about customs? I know Haarland hasn’t got enough cash
to lay out. Who has?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said glibly: “Usual arrangement, sir. They turn an
<span class="pageno" id="Page_21">21</span>estimated twenty-five per cent of the cargo over to the port
authority for auction, the receipts to be in full discharge of
their import tax. And I suppose they enter protective bids.
They aren’t wasting any time—auction’s 2100 tonight.”</p>

<p class="c007">“You handle it,” Oldham muttered. “Don’t go over one
hundred thousand shields. Diversify the purchases as much
as possible. And try to sneak some advance information
out of the dummies if you get a chance.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, sir,” Ross said. As he left he saw Oldham taking
a plastic bottle from a wall cabinet.</p>

<p class="c007">And that, thought Ross as he rode to the Free Port, was
the first crack he had ever seen in the determined optimism
of the trading firm’s top level. They were optimists and
they were idealists, at least to hear them tell it. Interplanetary
trading was a cause and a mission; the traders kept the
flame of commerce alight. Perhaps, thought Ross, they
had been able to indulge in the hypocrisy of idealism only
so long as a population upcurve assured them of an expanding
market. Perhaps now that births were flattening
out—some said the dirty word “declining”—they all
would drop their optimistic creed in favor of fang-and-claw
competition for the favors of the dwindling pool of consumers.</p>

<p class="c007">And that, Ross thought gloomily, was the way he’d go
himself if he stayed on: junior trader, to senior trader, to
master trader, growing every year more paranoidally suspicious
of his peers, less scrupulous in the chase of the
shield....</p>

<p class="c007">But he was getting out, of course. The purser’s berth
awaited. And then, perhaps, the awful depressions he had
been enduring would lift off him. He thought of the master
traders he knew: his own man Oldham, none too happy in
the hereditary business; Leverett, still smug and fat with
his terrific windfall of the Sirius IV starship fifteen years
ago; Marconi’s boss Haarland—Haarland broke the sequence
all to hell. It just wasn’t possible to think of Haarland
being driven by avarice and fear. He was the oldest
of them all, but there was more zest and drive in his parchment
body than in the rest of them combined.</p>

<p class="c007">In the auction hall Ross found a seat near the velvet
<span class="pageno" id="Page_22">22</span>ropes. One of the professional bidders lounging against a
wall flicked him an almost imperceptible signal, and he
answered with another. That was that; he had his man, and
a good one. They had often worked together in the commodity
pits, but not so often or so exclusively that the
bidder would be instantly known as his.</p>

<p class="c007">Inside the enclosure Marconi, seated at a bare table,
labored over a sheaf of papers with one of the “Sonnies”
from the ship. Sonny was wriggling in coveralls, the first
clothes he had ever worn. Ross saw they hadn’t been able
to get shoes onto him.</p>

<p class="c007">Who else did he know? Captain Delafield was sitting
somberly within the enclosure; Win Fraley, the hottest
auctioneer on the Port, was studying a list, his lips moving.
Every trading firm was represented; the heads of the smaller
firms were there in person, not daring to delegate the
bidding job. Plenty of Port personnel, just there for the
excitement of the first longliner in fifteen years, even
though it was well after close of the business day.</p>

<p class="c007">The goods were in sealed cases against the back wall as
usual. Ross could only tell that some of them were perforated
and therefore ought to contain living animals. Only
the one Sonny from the starship crew was there; presumably
the rest were back on the ship. He wouldn’t be able to
follow Oldham’s orders to snoop out the nature of the
freight from them. Well, damn Oldham; damn even the
auction, Ross thought to himself. His mood of gloom did
not lift.</p>

<p class="c007">The auction was a kind of letdown. All that turmoil and
bustle, concentrated in a tiny arc around the velvet ropes,
contrasted unpleasantly with the long, vacant rows of dusty
seats that stretched to the back of the hall. Maybe a couple
of centuries ago Ross would have enjoyed the auction
more. But now all it made him think of was the thing he
had been brooding about for a night and a day, the slow
emptying of the planet, the....</p>

<p class="c007">Decay.</p>

<p class="c007">But, as usual, no one else seemed to notice or to care.</p>

<p class="c007">Captain Delafield consulted his watch and stood up. He
rapped the table. “In accordance with the rules of the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_23">23</span>Trade Commission and the appropriate governing statutes,”
he droned, “certain merchandise will now be placed
on public auction. The Haarland Trading Corporation,
consignee, agrees and consents to divest itself of merchandise
from Consignment 97-W amounting by estimate of
the customs authorities to twenty-five per cent of the total
value of all merchandise in said consignment. All receipts
of this auction are to be entered as excise duties paid by the
consignee on said merchandise, said receipts to constitute
payment in full on excise on Consignment 97-W. The
clerk will record; if any person here present wishes to enter
an objection let him do so thank you.” He glanced at a
slip of paper in his hand. “I am requested to inform you
that the Haarland Trading Corporation has entered with
the clerk a protective bid of five thousand shields on each
item.” There was a rustle in the hall. Five thousand shields
was a lot of money. “Your auctioneer, Win Fraley,” said
Captain Delafield, and sat down in the first row of seats.</p>

<p class="c007">The auctioneer took a long, slow swallow of water, his
eyes gleaming above the glass at the audience. Theatrically
he tossed the glass to an assistant, smacked his hands together
and grinned. “Well,” he boomed genially, “I don’t
have to tell you gentlemen that somebody’s going to get
rich tonight. Who knows—maybe it’ll be you? But you
can’t make money without spending money, so without any
further ado, let’s get started. I have here,” he rapped out
briskly, “Item Number One. Now you don’t know and I
don’t know exactly what Item Number One contains, but I
can tell you this, they wouldn’t have sent it two hundred
and thirty-one lights if they didn’t think it was worth something.
Let’s get this started with a rush, folks, and I mean
with a big bid to get in the right mood. After all, the more
you spend here the less you have to pay in taxes,” he
laughed. “You ready? Here’s the dope. Item Number
One——” His assistant slapped a carton at the extreme left
of the line. “——weight two hundred and fifteen grams,
net; fifteen cubic centimeters; one microfilm reel included.
Reminds me,” he reminisced, “of an item just about that
size on the Sirius IV shipment. Turned out to be Maryjane
seeds, and I don’t suppose I have to tell anybody here how
<span class="pageno" id="Page_24">24</span>much Mr. Leverett made out of Maryjanes; I bet every one
of us has been smoking them ever since. What do you say,
Mr. Leverett? You did all right last time—want to say
ten thousand as a first big bid on Item Number One? Nine
thousand? Do I hear——?”</p>

<p class="c007">One of the smaller traders, not working through a professional
bidder, not even decently delegating the work to
a junior, bid seventy-five hundred shields. Like the spokesmen
for the other big traders, Ross sat on his hands during
the early stages. Let the small fry give themselves a thrill
and drop out. The big firms knew to a fraction of a shield
how much the small ones could afford to bid on a blind
purchase, and the easiest way to handle them was to let
them spend their budgets in a hurry. Of course the small
traders knew all this, and their strategy, when they could
manage it, was to hold back as long as possible. It was a
matter of sensing emotion rather than counting costs; of
recognizing the fraction of a second in which a little fellow
made up his mind to acquire an item and bidding him up—of
knowing when he’d gone his limit and letting him have it
at a ruinous price. It was an art, and Ross, despising it,
knew that he did it very, very well.</p>

<p class="c007">He yawned and pretended to read a magazine while the
first six items went on the block; the little traders seemed
desperate enough to force the price up without help. He bid
on Item Seven partly to squeeze a runt trader and partly
to test his liaison with his professional bidder. It was perfect;
the pro caught his signal—a bored inspection of his
fingernails—while seeming to peek clumsily at the man
from Leverett’s.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross let the next two pass and then acquired three items
in rapid succession. The fever had spread to most of the
bidders by then; they were starting at ten thousand and up.
One or two of the early birds had spent their budgets and
were leaving, looking sandbagged—as indeed they had
been. Ross signaled “take five” to his professional and
strolled out for a cup of coffee.</p>

<p class="c007">On the way back he stopped for a moment outside the
hall to look at the stars and breathe. There were the familiar
constellations—The Plowman, the Rocket Fleet, Marilyn
<span class="pageno" id="Page_25">25</span>Monroe. He stood smoking a cigarette and yearning toward
them until somebody moved in the darkness near him.
“Nice night, Ross,” the man said gloomily.</p>

<p class="c007">It was Captain Delafield. “Oh, hello, sir,” Ross said,
the world descending around him again like a too-substantial
curtain. “Taking a breather?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Had to,” the captain growled. “Ten more minutes in
that place and I would have thrown. Damned money-grabbing
traders. No offense, Ross; just that I don’t see how you
stand the life. Seems to have got worse in my time. Much
worse. You high-rollers goading the pee-wees into shooting
their wads—it didn’t use to be like that. Gallantry. Not
stomping a downed man. I don’t see how you stand it.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I can’t stand it,” Ross said quietly. “Captain Delafield,
you don’t know—I’m so sick to death of the life I’m leading
and the work I’m doing that I’d do anything to get away.
Mr. Fallon offered me a purser’s spot on his ship; I’ve been
thinking about it very seriously.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Purser? A dirty job. There’s nothing to do except when
you’re in port, and then there’s so much to do that you
never get to see the planet. I don’t recommend it, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross grunted, thinking. If even the purser’s berth was
no way out, what was left for him? Sixty more years of
waiting for a starship and scheming how to make a profit
from its contents? Sixty more years watching Ghost Town
grow by nibbles on Halsey City, watching the traders wax
in savagery as they battled for the ever-diminishing pool
of consumers, watching obscene comedies like Lurline of
the Old Landowners graciously consenting to wed Marconi
of the New Nobodies? He said wearily: “Then what shall I
do, Captain? Rot here with the rest of the planet?”</p>

<p class="c007">Delafield shrugged, suprisingly gentle. “You feel it too,
Ross? I’m glad to hear it. I’m not sensitive, thank God,
but I know they talk about me. They say I quit the space-going
fleet as soon as I had a chance to grab off the port
captaincy. They’re right; I did. Because I was frightened.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Frightened? You?” Delafield’s ribbons for a dozen heroic
rescues gleamed in the light that escaped from the hall.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, Ross.” He flicked the ribbons. “Each one of these
means I and my men pulled some people out of a jam they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_26">26</span>got into because of somebody’s damned stupidity or
slow reflexes or defective memory. No; I withdraw that.
The ‘Thetis’ got stove in because of mechanical failure, but
all the rest were human error. There got to be too many
for me; I want to enjoy my old age.</p>

<p class="c007">“Ready to face that if you become a purser? I can tell
you that if you don’t like it here you won’t be happy on
Sunward and you won’t like the moons. And you most
especially and particularly won’t like being a purser. It’s the
same job you’re doing now, but it pays less, offers you a
six-by-eight cubicle to work and live in, and gives you
nothing resembling a future to aim at. Now if you’ll excuse
me I’d better get back inside. I’ve enjoyed our talk.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross followed the captain gloomily. Nothing had
changed inside; Ross lounged in the doorway inconspicuously
picking up the eye of his bidder. Marconi was gone
from the enclosure. Ross looked around hopefully and
found his friend in agitated conversation with an unrecognizable
but also agitated man at the back of the hall. Ross
drifted over. Heads were turning in the front rows. As Ross
got within range he heard a couple of phrases. “——in the
ship. Mr. Haarland specially asked for you. Please, Mr.
Marconi!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, hell,” Marconi said disgustedly. “Go on. Tell him
I’ll be there. But how he expects me to take care of things
here and——” He trailed off as he caught sight of Ross.</p>

<p class="c007">“Trouble?” Ross asked.</p>

<p class="c007">“Not exactly. The hell with it.” Marconi stared indecisively
at the auctioneer for a moment. He said obscurely,
“Taking your life isn’t enough; he wants more. And I
thought I’d be able to see Lurline tonight. Excuse me, Ross.
I’ve got to get over to the ship.” He hurried out.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked wonderingly after him, caught the eye of his
bidder, and went back to work. By the time the auction was
over and dawn was breaking in the west, Oldham Trading
had bought nine lots of merchandise: three breathing, five
flowering, and one a roll of microfilm. Ross took his prizes
to the office where Charles Oldham was waiting, much the
better for a few drinks and a long nap.</p>

<p class="c007">“How much?” demanded Oldham. Evidently they were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_27">27</span>both supposed to ignore his hysteria of the night before.</p>

<p class="c007">“Fifty-seven thousand,” Ross said dully.</p>

<p class="c007">“For nine lots? Good man! With any kind of luck at
all——” And Oldham babbled on and on. He wanted Ross
to stay and view the microfilm projection, stand by for a
report from a zoologist and a botanist on the living acquisitions.
He pleaded weariness and Oldham became conciliatory
to the wonderful young up-and-comer who had bid in
the merchandise at a whopping bargain price.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross dragged himself from the building, into a cab, and
home. Morosely undressing he lit a cigarette and brooded:
well, that was it. What you’d been waiting for since you
were a junior apprentice. The starship came, you had the
alien prizes in your hands and you realized they were as
tawdry as the cheap gimcracks you export every week to
Sunward.</p>

<p class="c007">He stared out the window, over Ghost Town, to the
Field. The sun was high over the surrounding mountains;
he imagined he could pick out the reflected glimmer from
the starship a dozen miles away. Marconi at least got to
examine the ship. Marconi might be there now; he’d been
headed that way when Ross saw him last. And evidently
not enjoying it much. Ross wondered vaguely if anybody
really enjoyed anything. He stubbed out his cigarette.</p>

<p class="c007">As he fell asleep he was remembering what Delafield
had told him about the moons and the planet ports. His
dreams were of the cities of other planets, and every one
of them was populated by aloof Delafields and avaricious
Oldhams.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_28">28</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 3"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 3</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">“WAKE up, Ross,” Marconi was saying,
joggling him. “Come on, wake up.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross thrust himself up on an elbow and opened his eyes.
He said with a tongue the size of his forearm in a dust-lined
mouth: “Wha’ time is it? Wha’ the hell are you doing
here, for that matter?”</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s around noon. You’ve slept for three hours; you can
get up.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Uh.” Ross automatically reached for a cigarette. The
smoke got in his eyes and he rubbed them; it dehydrated
and seared what little healthy tissue appeared to be left in
his mouth. But it woke him up a little. “What are you
doing here?” he demanded.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi’s hand was involuntarily on his breast pocket
again, the one in which he carried Lurline’s picture. He said
harshly: “You want a job? Topside? Better than purser?”
He wasn’t meeting Ross’s eye. His gaze roved around the
apartment and lighted on a coffee maker. He filled it and
snapped it on. “Get dressed, will you?” he demanded.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross sat up. “What’s this all about, Marconi? What do
you want, anyway?”</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi, for his own reasons, became violently angry.
“You’re the damnedest question-asker I ever did meet,
Ross. I’m trying to do you a favor.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_29">29</span>“What favor?” Ross asked suspiciously.</p>

<p class="c007">“You’ll find out. You’ve been bellyaching to me long
enough about how dull your poor little life is. Well, I’m
offering you a chance to do something big and different.
And what do you do? You crawfish. Are you interested or
aren’t you? I told you: It’s a space job, and a big one.
Bigger than being a purser for Fallon. Bigger than you can
imagine.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross began to struggle into his clothes, no more than
half comprehending, but stimulated by the magic words.
He asked, puzzling sleepily over what Marconi had said,
“What are you sore about?” His guess was that Lurline had
broken a date—but it seemed to be the wrong time of day
for that.</p>

<p class="c007">“Nothing,” Marconi said grumpily. “Only I have my
own life to live.” He poured two cups of coffee. He wouldn’t
answer questions while they sipped the scalding stuff. But
somehow Ross was not surprised when, downstairs, Marconi
headed his car along the winding road through Ghost
Town that led to the Yards.</p>

<p class="c007">Every muscle of Ross’s body was stiff and creaky; another
six hours of sleep would have been a wonderful thing.
But as they drove through the rutted streets of Ghost Town
he began to feel alive again. He stared out the window at
the flashing ruins, piecing together the things Marconi had
said.</p>

<p class="c007">“Watch it!” he yelled, and Marconi swerved the car
around a tumbled wall. Ross was shaking, but Marconi
only drove faster. This was crazy! You didn’t race through
Ghost Town as though you were on the pleasure parkways
around the Great Blue Lake; it wasn’t safe. The buildings
had to fall over from time to time—nobody, certainly,
bothered to keep them in repair. And nobody bothered to
pick up the pieces when they fell, either, until the infrequent
road-mending teams made their rounds.</p>

<p class="c007">But at last they were out of Ghost Town, on the broad
highway from Halsey City to the port. The administration
building and car park was just ahead.</p>

<p class="c007">It was there that Marconi spoke again. “I’m assuming,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_30">30</span>Ross, that you weren’t snowing me when you said you
wanted thrills, chills, and change galore.”</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s not the way I put it. But I wasn’t snowing you.”</p>

<p class="c007">“You’ll get them. Come on.”</p>

<p class="c007">He led Ross across the field to the longliner, past a
gaggle of laughing, chattering Sonnies and Mas. He ignored
them.</p>

<p class="c007">The longliner was a giant of a ship, a blunt torpedo a
hundred meters tall. It had no ports—naturally enough;
the designers of the ship certainly didn’t find any reason
for its idiot crew to look out into space, and landings and
takeoffs would be remote-controlled. Two hundred years
old it was; but its metal was as bright, its edges as sharp, as
the newest of the moon freighters at the other end of the
hardstand. Two hundred years—a long trip, but an almost
unimaginably long distance that trip covered. For the star
that spawned it was undoubtedly almost as far away as
light would travel in two centuries’ time. At 186,000 miles
per second, sixty seconds in a minute, sixty minutes in an
hour. Ross’s imagination gave up the task. It was far.</p>

<p class="c007">He stared about him in fascination as they entered the
ship. He gaped at sterile, gray-walled cubicles, each of
which contained the same chair and cot—no screen or projector
for longliners. Ross remembered his rash words of
the day before about shipping out on a longliner, and shuddered.</p>

<p class="c007">“Here we are,” said Marconi stopping before a closed
door. He knocked and entered.</p>

<p class="c007">It was a cubicle like the others, but there were reels
stacked on the floor and a projector. Sitting on the cot in a
just-awakened attitude was old man Haarland himself.
Beady-eyed, Ross thought. Watchful.</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland asked: “Ross?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, sir,” Marconi said. There was tension in his voice
and attitude. “Do you want me to stay, sir?”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland growled: “Good God, no. You can get out.
Sit down, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross sat down. Marconi, carefully looking neither to
right or left, went out and closed the door. Haarland
stretched, scratched, and yawned. He said: “Ross, Marconi
<span class="pageno" id="Page_31">31</span>tells me you’re quite a fellow. Sincere, competent, a
good man to give a tough job to. Namely, his.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Junior-Fourth Trader?” Ross asked, bewildered.</p>

<p class="c007">“A little more dramatic than that—but we’ll come to the
details in a minute. I’m told you were ready to quit Oldham
for a purser’s berth. That’s ethical. Would you consider it
unethical to quit Oldham for Haarland?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes—I think I would.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Glad to hear it! What if the work had absolutely nothing
to do with trading and never brings you into a competitive
situation with Oldham?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well——” Ross scratched his jaw. “Well, I think that
would be all right. But a Junior Fourth’s job, Mr. Haarland——”
The floor bucked and surged under him. He
gasped, “What was that?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Blastoff, I imagine,” Haarland said calmly. “We’re taking
off. Better lie down.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross flopped to the floor. It was no time to argue, not
with the first-stage pumps thundering and the preheaters
roaring their threat of an imminent four-G thrust.</p>

<p class="c007">It came like thunder, slapping Ross against the floor
plates as though he were glued to them. He felt every tiny
wrinkle in every weld he lay on, and one arm had fallen
across a film reel. He heaved, and succeeded in levering
it off the reel. It thwacked to the floor as though sandbags
were stacked meters-high atop it.</p>

<p class="c007">Blackout came very soon.</p>

<p class="c007">He awoke in free fall. He was orbiting aimlessly about
the cubicle.</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland was strapped to the cot, absorbed in manipulating
the portable projector, trying to thread a free-floating
film. Ross bumped against the old man; Haarland abstractedly
shoved him off.</p>

<p class="c007">He careened from a bulkhead and flailed for a grip.</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh,” said Haarland, looking up. “Awake?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, awake!” Ross said bitterly. “What is all this?
Where are we?”</p>

<p class="c007">The old man said formally, “Please forgive my cavalier
treatment of you. You must not blame your friend Marconi;
he had no idea that I was planning an immediate
<span class="pageno" id="Page_32">32</span>blastoff with you. I had an assignment for him which he—he
preferred not to accept. Not to mince words, Ross, he
quit.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Quit his job?”</p>

<p class="c007">The old man shook his head. “No, Ross. Quit much
more than the job of working for me. He quit on an assignment
which is—I am sorry if it sounds melodramatic—absolutely
vital to the human race.” He suddenly frowned.
“I—I think,” he added weakly. “Bear with me, Ross. I’ll
try to explain as I go along. But, you see, Marconi left me
in the lurch. I needed him and he failed me. He felt that
you would be glad to take it on, and he told me something
about you.” Haarland glowered at Ross and said, with a
touch of bitterness, “A recommendation from Marconi, at
this particular point, is hardly any recommendation at all.
But I haven’t much choice—and, besides, I took the liberty
of calling that pompous young fool you work for.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Mister Haarland!” Ross cried, outraged. “Oldham may
not be any prize but really——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, you know he’s a fool. But he had a lot to say about
you. Enough so that, if you want the assignment, it’s yours.
As to the nature of the assignment itself——” Haarland
hesitated, then said briskly, “The assignment itself has to
do with a message my organization received via this longliner.
Yes, a message. You’ll see. It has also to do with certain
facts I’ve found in its log which, if I can ever get this
damned thing working——There we are.”</p>

<p class="c007">He had succeeded in threading the film.</p>

<p class="c007">He snapped on the projector. On the screen appeared a
densely packed block of numerals, rolling up and being replaced
by new lines as fast as the eye could take them in.
Haarland said, “Notice anything?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross swallowed. “If that stuff is supposed to mean anything
to me,” he declared, “it doesn’t.”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland frowned. “But Marconi said——Well, never
mind.” He snapped off the projector. “That was the ship’s
log, Ross. It doesn’t matter if you can’t read it; you
wouldn’t, I suppose, have had much call for that sort of
thing working for Oldham. It is a mathematical description
of the routing of this ship, from the time it was space-launched
<span class="pageno" id="Page_33">33</span>until it arrived here yesterday. It took a long time,
Ross. The reason that it took a long time is partly that it
came from far away. But, even more, there is another
reason. We were not this ship’s destination! Not the original
destination. We weren’t even the first alternate—or the
second alternate. To be exact, Ross, we were the seventh
choice for this ship.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross let go of his stanchion, floated a yard, and flailed
back to it. “That’s ridiculous, Mr. Haarland,” he protested.
“Besides, what has all this to do with——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Bear with an old man,” said Haarland, with an amused
gleam in his eye.</p>

<p class="c007">There was very little he could do but bear with him,
Ross thought sourly. “Go on,” he said.</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland said professorially, “It is conceivable, of
course, that a planet might be asleep at the switch. We
could believe it, I suppose, if it seemed that the first-choice
planet somehow didn’t pick the ship up when this longliner
came into radar range. In that event, of course, it would
orbit once or twice on automatics, and then select for its
first alternate target—which it did. It might be a human
failure in the GCA station—once.” He nodded earnestly.
“Once, Ross. Not six times. No planet passes up a trading
ship.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Mr. Haarland,” Ross exploded, “it seems to me that
you’re contradicting yourself all over the place. Did six
planets pass this ship up or didn’t six planets pass this ship
up? Which is it? And why would anybody pass a longliner
up anyhow?”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland asked, “Suppose the planets were vacant?”</p>

<p class="c007">“What?” Ross was shaken. “But that’s silly! I mean, even
I know that the star charts show which planets are inhabited
and which aren’t.”</p>

<p class="c007">“And suppose the star charts are wrong. Suppose the
planets have become vacant. The people have died off,
perhaps; their culture decayed.”</p>

<p class="c007">Decay. Death and decay.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross was silent for a long time. He took a deep breath.
He said at last, “Sorry. I won’t interrupt again.”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland’s expression was a weft of triumph and relief.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_34">34</span>“Six planets passed this ship up. Remember Leverett’s
ship fifteen years ago? Three planets passed that one before
it came to us. Nine different planets, all listed on the traditional
star charts as inhabited, civilized, equipped with
GCA radars, and everything else needed. Nine planets out
of communication, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">Decay, thought Ross. Aloud he said, “Tell me why.”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland shook his head. “No,” he said strongly, “I want
you to tell me. I’ll tell you what I can. I’ll tell you the
message that this ship brought to me. I’ll tell you all I
know, all I’ve told Marconi that he isn’t man enough to
use, and the things that Marconi will never learn, as well.
But why nine planets that used to be pretty much like our
own planet are now out of communication, that you’ll have
to tell me.”</p>

<p class="c007">Forward rockets boomed; the braking blasts hurled Ross
against the forward bulkhead. Haarland rummaged under
the cot for space suits. He flung one at Ross.</p>

<p class="c007">“Put it on,” he ordered. “Come to the airlock. I’ll show
you what you can use to find out the answers.” He slid
into the pressure suit, dived weightless down the corridor,
Ross zooming after.</p>

<p class="c007">They stood in the airlock, helmets sealed. Wordlessly
Haarland opened the pet cocks, heaved on the lock door.
He gestured with an arm.</p>

<p class="c007">Floating alongside them was a ship, a ship like none Ross
had ever seen before.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_35">35</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 4"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 4</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">PICTURE Leif’s longboat bobbing in the
swells outside Ambrose Light, while the twentieth-century
liners steam past; a tiny, ancient thing, related to the new
giants only as the Eohippus resembles the horse.</p>

<p class="c007">The ship that Haarland revealed was fully as great a
contrast. Ross knew spaceships as well as any grounder
could, both the lumbering interplanet freighters and the
titanic longliners. But the ship that swung around Halsey’s
Planet was a midget (fueled rocket ships must be huge);
its jets were absurdly tiny, clearly incapable of blasting
away from planetary gravity; its entire hull length was
unbroken and sheer (did the pilot dare fly blind?).</p>

<p class="c007">The coupling connections were being rigged between the
ships. “Come aboard,” said Haarland, spryly wriggling
through the passage. Ross, swallowing his astonishment,
followed.</p>

<p class="c007">The ship was tiny indeed. When Ross and Haarland,
clutching handholds, were drifting weightlessly in its central
control cabin, they very nearly filled it. There was one
other cabin, Ross saw; and the two compartments accounted
for a good nine-tenths of the cubage of the ship.
Where that left space for the combustion chambers and
the fuel tanks, the crew quarters, and the cargo holds, Ross
could not imagine. He said: “All right, Mr. Haarland.
Talk.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_36">36</span>Haarland grinned toothily, his expression eerie in the
flickering violet light that issued from a gutter around the
cabin’s wall.</p>

<p class="c007">“This is a spaceship, Ross. It’s a pretty old one—fourteen
hundred years, give or take a little. It’s not much to
look at, compared with the up-to-date models you’re used
to, but it’s got a few features that you won’t find on the
new ones. For one thing, Ross, it doesn’t use rockets.”
He hesitated. “Ask me what it does use,” he admitted, “and
I can’t tell you. I know the name, because I read it: nucleophoretic
drive. What nucleophoresis is and how it
works, I can’t say. They call it the Wesley Effect, and the
tech manual says something about squared miles of acceleration.
Does that mean anything to you? No. How could
it? But it works, Ross. It works well enough so that this
little ship will get you where you’re going very quickly.
The stars, Ross—it will take you to the stars. Faster than
light. What the top speed is I have no idea; but there is a
ship’s log here, too. And it has a three-month entry—three
months, Ross!—in which this little ship explored the solar
systems of fourteen stars.”</p>

<p class="c007">Wide-eyed, Ross held motionless. Haarland paused.
“Fourteen hundred years,” he repeated. “Fourteen hundred
years this ship has been floating out here. And for all that
time, the longliners have been crawling from star to star,
while little hidden ships like this one could have carried a
thousand times as much goods a million times faster. Maybe
the time has come to get the ships out of hiding. I don’t
know. I want to find out; I want you to find out for me.
I’ll be specific, Ross. I need a pilot. I’m too old, and Marconi
turned it down. Someone has to go out there——”
he gestured to the blind hull and the unseen stars beyond—“and
find out why nine planets are out of communication.
Will you do it?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross opened his mouth to speak, and a thousand questions
competed for utterance. But what he said, barely
aloud, was only: “Yes.”</p>

<p class="c007">The far-off stars—more than a thousand million of them
in our galaxy alone. By far the greatest number of them
drifted alone through space, or with only a stellar companion
<span class="pageno" id="Page_37">37</span>as utterly unlivable by reason of heat and crushing
gravity as themselves. Fewer than one in a million had a
family of planets, and most even of those could never become
a home for human life.</p>

<p class="c007">But out of a thousand million, any fraction may be a
very large number, and the number of habitable planets
was in the hundreds.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross had seen the master charts of the inhabited universe
often enough to recognize the names as Haarland mentioned
them: Tau Ceti II, Earth, the eight inhabitable
worlds of Capella. But to realize that this ship—this ship!—had
touched down on each of them, and on a hundred
more, was beyond astonishment; it was a dream thing, impossible
but unquestioned.</p>

<p class="c007">Through Haarland’s burning, old eyes, Ross looked back
through fourteen centuries, to the time when this ship was
a scout vessel for a colonizing colossus. The lumbering
giant drove slowly through space on its one-way trip from
the planet that built it—was it semi-mythical Earth? The
records were not clear—while the tiny scout probed each
star and solar system as it drew within range. While the
mother ship was covering a few hundred million miles, the
scout might flash across parsecs to scan half a dozen
worlds. And when the scout came back with word of a
planet where humans could survive, they christened it
with the name of the scout’s pilot, and the chartroom labored,
and the ship’s officers gave orders, and the giant’s
nose swerved through a half a degree and began its long,
slow deceleration.</p>

<p class="c007">“Why slow?” Ross demanded. “Why not use the faster-than-light
drive for the big ships?”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland grimaced. “I’ve got to answer that one for you
sooner or later,” he said, “but let me make it later. Anyway,
that’s what this ship was: a faster-than-light scout ship for
a real longliner. What happened to the longliner the records
don’t show; my guess is the colonists cannibalized it to get
a start in constructing homes for themselves. But the scout
ship was exempted. The captain of the expedition had it
put in an orbit out here, and left alone. It’s been used a
little bit, now and then—my great-grandfather’s father
<span class="pageno" id="Page_38">38</span>went clear to 40 Eridani when my great-grandfather was a
little boy, but by and large it has been left alone. It had to
be, Ross. For one thing, it’s dangerous to the man who
pilots it. For another, it’s dangerous to—the Galaxy.”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland’s view was anthropomorphic; the danger
was not to the immense and uncaring galaxy, but to the
sparse fester of life that called itself humanity.</p>

<p class="c007">When the race abandoned Earth, it was a gesture of
revulsion. Behind them they left a planet that had decimated
itself in wars; ahead lay a cosmos that, in all their
searches, had revealed no truly sentient life.</p>

<p class="c007">Earth was a crippled world, the victim of its playing
with nuclear fission and fusion. But the techniques that gave
them a faster-than-light drive gave them as well a weapon
that threatened solar systems, not cities; that could detonate
a sun as readily as uranium could destroy a building. The
child with his forbidden matches was now sitting atop a
munitions dump; the danger was no longer a seared hand
or blinded eye, but annihilation.</p>

<p class="c007">And the decision had been made: secrecy. By what condign
struggles the secrecy had been enforced, the secrecy
itself concealed. But it had worked. Once the radiating
colonizers had reached their goals, the nucleophoretic effect
had been obliterated from their records and, except for a
single man on each planet, from their minds.</p>

<p class="c007">Why the single man? Why not bury it entirely?</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland said slowly, “There was always the chance
that something would go wrong, you see. And—it has.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said hesitantly, “You mean the nine planets that
have gone out of communication?”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland nodded. He hesitated. “Do you understand it
now?” he asked.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross shook his head dizzily. “I’m trying,” he said. “This
little ship—it travels faster than light. It has been circling
out here—how long? Fourteen hundred years? And you
kept it secret—you and your ancestors before you because
you were afraid it might be used in war?” He was frowning.</p>

<p class="c007">“Not ‘afraid’ it would be used,” Haarland corrected
gently. “We knew it would be used.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_39">39</span>Ross grimaced. “Well, why tell me about it now? Do you
expect me to keep it secret all the rest of my life?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I think you would,” Haarland said soberly.</p>

<p class="c007">“But suppose I didn’t? Suppose I blabbed all over the
Galaxy, and it was used in war?”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland’s face was suddenly, queerly gray. He said,
almost to himself, “It seems that there are things worse than
war.” Abruptly he smiled. “Let’s find Ma.”</p>

<p class="c007">They returned through the coupling and searched the
longliner for the old woman. A Sonny told them, “Ma
usually hangs around the meter room. Likes to see them
blinking.” And there they found her.</p>

<p class="c007">“Hello, Haarland,” she smiled, flashing her superb teeth.
“Did you find what you were looking for?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Perfect, Ma. I want to talk to you under the seal.”</p>

<p class="c007">She looked at Ross. “Him?” she asked.</p>

<p class="c007">“I vouch for him,” Haarland said gravely. “Wesley.”</p>

<p class="c007">She answered, “The limiting velocity is C.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But C<sup>2</sup> is not a velocity,” Haarland said. He turned to
Ross. “Sorry to make a mystery,” he apologized. “It’s a
recognition formula. It identifies one member of what we
call the Wesley families, or its messenger, to another. And
these people are messengers. They were dispatched a couple
of centuries ago by a Wesley family whose ship, for
some reason, no longer could be used. Why?—I don’t know
why. Try your luck, maybe you can figure it out. Ma, tell
us the history again.”</p>

<p class="c007">She knitted her brows and began to chant slowly:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“In great-grandfather’s time the target was Clyde,</div>
      <div class="line">Rocketry firm and ores on the side.</div>
      <div class="line">If we hadn’t of seen them direct we’d of missed ’em;</div>
      <div class="line">There wasn’t a blip from the whole damn system.</div>
      <div class="line in4">That was the first.</div>
      <div class="line">Before great-grandfather’s day was done</div>
      <div class="line">We cut the orbit of Cyrnus One.</div>
      <div class="line">The contact there was Trader McCue,</div>
      <div class="line">But the sons o’ bitches missed us too.</div>
      <div class="line in4">That was the second.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_40">40</span>My grandpa lived to see the green</div>
      <div class="line">Of Target Three through the high-powered screen.</div>
      <div class="line">But where in hell was Builder Carruthers?</div>
      <div class="line">They let us go by like all the others.</div>
      <div class="line in4">That was the——”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">“Ma,” said Haarland. “Thanks very much, but would
you skip to the last one?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ma grinned.</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Haarland Trading Corp. was last</div>
      <div class="line">With the fuel down low and going fast.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m glad it was me who saw the day</div>
      <div class="line">When they brought us down on GCA.</div>
      <div class="line">I told him the message; he called it a mystery,</div>
      <div class="line">But anyway this is the end of the history.</div>
      <div class="line in4">And it’s about time!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">“The message, please,” Haarland said broodingly.</p>

<p class="c007">Ma took a deep breath and rattled off: “L-sub-T equals
L-sub-zero e to the minus-T-over-two-N.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gaped. “That’s the message?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Used to be more to it,” Ma said cheerfully “That’s all
there is now, though. The darn thing doesn’t rhyme or anything.
I guess that’s the most important part. Anyway, it’s
the hardest.”</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s not as bad as it seems,” Haarland told Ross. “I’ve
asked around. It makes a very little sense.”</p>

<p class="c007">“It does?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well, up to a point,” Haarland qualified. “It seems to
be a formula in genetics. The notation is peculiar, but it’s
all explained, of course. It has something to do with gene
loss. Now, maybe that means something and maybe it
doesn’t. But I know something that does mean something:
some member of a Wesley Family a couple of hundred
years ago thought it was important enough to want to get
it across to other Wesley families. Something’s happening.
Let’s find out what it is, Ross.” The old man suddenly
buried his face in his hands. In a cracked voice he mumbled,
“Gene loss and war. Gene loss or war. God, I wish
<span class="pageno" id="Page_41">41</span>somebody would take this right out of my hands—or that
I could drop with a heart attack this minute. You ever
think of war, Ross?”</p>

<p class="c007">Shocked and embarrassed, Ross mumbled some kind of
answer. One might think of war, good breeding taught, but
one never talked about it.</p>

<p class="c007">“You should,” the old man said hoarsely. “War is what
this faster-than-light secrecy and identification rigmarole is
all about. Right now war is impossible—between solar systems,
anyhow, and that’s what counts. A planet might just
barely manage to fit an invading multigeneration expedition
at gigantic cost, but it never would. The fruits of victory—loot,
political domination, maybe slaves—would never
come back to the fitters of the expedition but to their remote
descendants. A firm will take a flyer on a commercial
deal like that, but no nation would accept a war on any
such basis—because a conqueror is a man, and men die.
With F-T-L—faster-than-light travel—they might invade
Curnus or Azor or any of those other tempting dots on the
master maps. Why not? Take the marginal population, hop
them up with patriotic fervor and lust for booty, and ship
them off to pillage and destroy. There’s at least a fifty per
cent chance of coming out ahead on the investment, isn’t
there? Much more attractive deal commercially speaking
than our present longliners.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross had never seen a war. The last on Halsey’s planet
had been the Peninsular Rebellion about a century and a
half ago. Some half a million constitutional psychopathic
inferiors had started themselves an ideal society with theocratic
trimmings in a remote and unfruitful corner of the
planet. Starved and frustrated by an unrealistic moral creed
they finally exploded to devastate their neighboring areas
and were quickly quarantined by a radioactive zone. They
disintegrated internally, massacred their priesthood, and
were permitted to disperse. It was regarded as a shameful
episode by every dweller on the planet. It wasn’t a subject
for popular filmreels; if you wanted to find out about the
Peninsular Rebellion you went through many successive
library doors and signed your name on lists, and were
sternly questioned as to your age and scholarly qualifications
<span class="pageno" id="Page_42">42</span>and reasons for sniffing around such an unsavory
mess.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross therefore had not the slightest comprehension of
Haarland’s anxiety. He told him so.</p>

<p class="c007">“I hope you’re right,” was all the old man would say. “I
hope you don’t learn worse.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">The rest was work.</p>

<p class="c007">He had the Yard worker’s familiarity with conventional
rocketry, which saved him some study of the fine-maneuvering
apparatus of the F-T-L craft—but not much. For
a week under Haarland’s merciless drilling he jetted the
ship about its remote area of space, far from the commerce
lanes, until the old man grudgingly pronounced himself
satisfied.</p>

<p class="c007">There were skull-busting sessions with the Wesley drive,
or rather with a first derivative of it, an insane-looking object
which you could vaguely describe as a fan-shaped
slide rule taller than a man. There were twenty-seven main
tracks, analogues of the twenty-seven main geodesics of
Wesley Space—whatever they were and whatever that was.
Your cursor settings on the main tracks depended on a
thirty-two step computation based on the apparent magnitudes
of the twenty-seven nearest celestial bodies above a
certain mass which varied according to yet another lengthy
relationship. Then, having cleared the preliminaries out of
the way, you began to solve for your actual setting on the
F-T-L drive controls.</p>

<p class="c007">Somehow he mastered it, while Haarland, driving himself
harder than he drove the youth who was to be his
exploring eyes and ears, coached him and cursed him and—somehow!—kept
his own complicated affairs going back
on Halsey’s Planet. When Ross had finally got the theory of
the Wesley Drive in some kind of order in his mind, and
had learned all there was to learn about the other worlds,
and had cut his few important ties with Halsey’s Planet, he
showed up in Haarland’s planet-based office for a final, repetitive
briefing.</p>

<p class="c007">Marconi was there.</p>

<p class="c007">He had trouble meeting Ross’s eyes, but his handclasp
<span class="pageno" id="Page_43">43</span>was firm and his voice warmly friendly—and a little envious.
“The very best, Ross,” he said. “I—I wish——” He
hesitated and stammered. He said, in a flood, “Damn it,
I should be going! Do a good job, Ross—and I hope you
don’t hate me.” And he left while Ross, disturbed, went in
to see old man Haarland.</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland spared no time for sentiment. “You’re cleared
for space flight,” he growled. “According to the visa, you’re
going to Sunward—in case anyone asks you between here
and the port. Actually, let’s hear where you <i>are</i> going.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said promptly, “I am going on a mission of exploration
and reconnaissance. My first proposed destination
is Ragansworld; second Gemser, third Azor. If I cannot
make contact with any of these three planets, I will
select planets at random from the master charts until I find
some Wesley Drive families somewhere. The contacts for
the first three planets are: On Ragansworld, Foley Associates;
on Gemser, the Franklin Foundation; on Azor,
Cavallo Machine Tool Company. F-T-L contacts on other
planets are listed in the appendix to the master charts. The
co-ordinates for Ragansworld are——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Skip the co-ordinates,” mumbled Haarland, rubbing
his eyes. “What do you do when you get in contact with a
Wesley Drive family?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross hesitated and licked his lips. “I—well, it’s a little
hard——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Dammit,” roared Haarland, “I’ve told you a <i>thousand</i>
times——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yessir, I know. All I meant was I don’t exactly understand
what I’m looking for.”</p>

<p class="c007">“If I knew what you were to look for,” Haarland rasped,
“I wouldn’t have to send you out looking! Can’t you get it
through your thick head? <i>Something</i> is wrong. I don’t know
what. Maybe I’m crazy for bothering about it—heaven
knows, I’ve got troubles enough right here—but we Haarlands
have a tradition of service, and maybe it’s so old
that we’ve kind of forgotten just what it’s all about. But
it’s not so old that I’ve forgotten the family tradition. If I
had a son, he’d be doing this. I counted on Marconi to be
<span class="pageno" id="Page_44">44</span>my son; now all I have left is you. And that’s little enough,
heaven knows,” he finished bitterly.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, wounded, said by rote: “On landing, I will attempt
at once to make contact with the local Wesley Drive
family, using the recognition codes given me. I will report
to them on all the data at hand and suggest the need for
action.”</p>

<p class="c007">Haarland stood up. “All right,” he said. “Sorry I
snapped at you. Come on; I’ll go up to the ship with you.”</p>

<p class="c007">And that was the way it happened. Ross found himself
in the longliner, then with Haarland in the tiny, ancient,
faster-than-light ship which had once been tender to the
ship that colonized Halsey’s Planet. He found himself
shaking hands with a red-eyed, suddenly-old Haarland,
watching him crawl through the coupling to the longliner,
watching the longliner blast away.</p>

<p class="c007">He found himself setting up the F-T-L course and throwing
in the drive.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_45">45</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 5"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 5</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">ROSS was lucky. The second listed inhabited
planet was still inhabited.</p>

<p class="c007">He had not quite stopped shuddering from the first
when the approach radar caught him. The first planet was
given in the master charts as “Ragansworld. Pop. 900,000,000;
diam. 9400 m.; mean orbit 0.8 AU,” and its co-ordinates
went on to describe it as the fourth planet of a
small G-type sun. There had been some changes made:
the co-ordinates now intersected well inside a bright and
turbulent gas cloud.</p>

<p class="c007">It appeared that suppressing the F-T-L drive had not
quite annihilated war.</p>

<p class="c007">But the second planet, Gemser—there, he was sure, was
a world where nothing was seriously awry.</p>

<p class="c007">He left the ship mumbling a name to himself: “Franklin
Foundation.” And he was greeted by a corporal’s guard
of dignified and ceremonially dressed men; they smiled at
him, welcomed him, shook his hand, and invited him to
what seemed to be the local equivalent of the administration
building. He noticed disapprovingly that they didn’t
seem to go in for the elaborate decontamination procedures
of Halsey’s Planet, but perhaps, he thought, they had bred
disease-resistance into their bloodlines. Certainly the four
men in his guide party seemed hale and well-preserved,
though the youngest of them was not less than sixty.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_46">46</span>“I would like,” he said, “to be put in touch with the
Franklin Foundation, please.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Come right in here,” beamed one of the four, and another
said:</p>

<p class="c007">“Don’t worry about a thing.” They held the door for
him, and he walked into a small and sybaritically furnished
room. The second man said, “Just a few questions. Where
are you from?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said simply, “Halsey’s Planet,” and waited.</p>

<p class="c007">Nothing happened, except that all four men nodded
comprehendingly, and the questioner made a mark on a
sheet of paper. Ross amplified, “Fifty-three light years
away. You know—another star.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Certainly,” the man said briskly. “Your name?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross told him, but with a considerable feeling of deflation.
He thought wryly of his own feelings about the longlines
and the far stars; he remembered the stir and community
excitement that a starship meant back home. Still,
Ross told himself. Halsey’s Planet might be just a back
eddy in the main currents of civilization. Quite possibly on
another world—this one, for instance—travelers from the
stars were a commonplace. The field hadn’t seemed overly
busy, though; and there was nothing resembling a spaceship.
Unless—he thought with a sudden sense of shock—those
rusting hulks clumped together at the edge of the
field had once been spaceships. But that was hardly likely,
he reassured himself. You just don’t let spaceships rust.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sex?” the man asked, and “Age?” “Education?” “Marital
status?” The questions went on for more time than
Ross quite understood; and they seemed far from relevant
questions for the most part; and some of them were hard
questions to answer. “Tau quotient?” for instance; Ross
blinked and said, with an edge to his voice:</p>

<p class="c007">“I don’t know what a tau quotient is.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Put him down as zero,” one of the men advised, and
the interlocutor nodded happily.</p>

<p class="c007">“Working-with-others rating?” he asked, beaming.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said with controlled irritation, “Look, I don’t know
anything about these ratings. Will you take me to somebody
who can put me in touch with the Franklin Foundation?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_47">47</span>The man who was sitting next to him patted him gently
on the shoulder. “Just answer the questions,” he said comfortably.
“Everything will be all right.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross flared, “The hell everything will——”</p>

<p class="c007">Something with electrified spikes in it hit him on the
back of the neck.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross yelled and ducked away; the man next to him returned
a little rod to his pocket. He smiled at Ross. “Don’t
feel bad,” he said sympathetically. “Go ahead now, answer
the questions.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross shook his head dazedly. The pain was already
leaving his neck, but he felt nauseated by the suddenness
and sharpness of it; he could not remember any pain quite
like that in his life. He stood up waveringly and said,
“Wait a minute, now——”</p>

<p class="c007">This time it was the man on the other side, and the
pain was about twice as sharp. Ross found himself on the
floor, looking up through a haze. The man on his right
kept the rod in his hand, and the expression on his face,
while in no way angry, was stern. “Bad boy,” he said tenderly.
“Why don’t you want to answer the questions?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gasped, “God damn it, all I want is to see somebody!
Keep your dirty hands off me, you old fools!” And
that was a mistake, as he learned in the blessedly few minutes
before he passed out completely under the little rods
held by the gentle but determined men.</p>

<p class="c007">He answered all the questions—bound to a chair, with
two of the men behind him, when he had regained consciousness.
He answered every one. They only had to hit
him twice.</p>

<p class="c007">When they untied him the next morning, Ross had
caught on to the local folkways quite well. The fatherly
fellow who released him said, “Follow me,” and stood
back, smiling but with one hand on one of the little rods.
And Ross was careful to say:</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, sir!”</p>

<p class="c007">They rode in a three-wheeled car, and entered a barracks-like
building. Ross was left alone next to a bed in a dormitory
with half a hundred beds. “Just wait here,” the man
said, smiling. “The rest of your group is out at their morning
<span class="pageno" id="Page_48">48</span>session now. When they come in for lunch you can join
them. They’ll show you what to do.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross didn’t have too long to wait. He spent the time in
conjecture as confused as it was fruitless; he had obviously
done something wrong, but just what was it?</p>

<p class="c007">If he had had twice as long he would have got no farther
toward an answer than he was: nowhere. But a noise outside
ended his speculations. He glanced toward the curiously
shaped door—all the doors on this planet seemed
to be rectangular. A girl of about eighteen was peering inside.</p>

<p class="c007">She stared at Ross and said, “Oh!” Then she disappeared.
There were footsteps and whispers, and more heads
appeared and blinked at him and were jerked back.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross stood up in wretched apprehension. All of a sudden
he was fourteen years old again, and entering a new
school where the old hands were giggling and whispering
about the new boy. He swore sullenly to himself.</p>

<p class="c007">A new face appeared, halted for an inspection of Ross,
and walked confidently in. The man was a good forty
years old, Ross thought; perhaps a kind of overseer in this
institution—whatever kind of institution it was. He approached
Ross at a sedate pace, and he was followed
through the door in single file by a couple score men and
women. They ranged in age, Ross thought wonderingly,
from the leader’s forty down to the late teens of the girl
who had first peered in the door, and now was at the end
of the procession.</p>

<p class="c007">The leader said, “How old are you?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Why, uh——” Ross figured confusedly: this planet’s
annual orbital period was roughly forty per cent longer
than his own; fourteen into his age, multiplied by ten,
making his age in their local calculations....</p>

<p class="c007">“Why, I’m nineteen of your years old, about. And a
half.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes. And what can you do?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Look here, sir. I’ve been through all this once. Why
don’t you go and ask those gentlemen who brought me
here? And can anybody tell me where the Franklin Foundation
is?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_49">49</span>The fortyish fellow, with a look of outrage, slapped Ross
across the mouth. Ross knocked him down with a roundhouse
right.</p>

<p class="c007">A girl yelled, “Good for you, Junior!” and jumped like
a wildcat onto a slim, gray-haired lady, clawing, and slapping.
The throng dissolved immediately into a wild melee.
Ross, busily fighting off the fortyish fellow and a couple of
his stocky buddies, noted only that the scrap was youth
against age, whatever it meant.</p>

<p class="c007">“How <i>dare</i> you?” a voice thundered, and the rioters
froze.</p>

<p class="c007">A decrepit wreck was standing in the doorway, surrounded
by three or four gerontological textbook cases
only a little less spavined than he. “Glory,” a girl muttered
despairingly. “It would be the minister.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What is the meaning of this brawl?” rolled from the
wreck’s shriveled lips in a rich basso—no; rolled, Ross
noted, from a flat perforated plate on his chest. There was
a small, flesh-colored mike slung before his lips. “Who is
responsible here?” asked the golden basso.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s fortyish assailant said humbly: “I am, sir. This
new fellow here——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Manners! Speak when you’re spoken to.”</p>

<p class="c007">Abjectly: “Yes, sir. I’m sorry, sir.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Silly fools!” the senile wreck hectored them. “I’m going
to take no official notice of this since I’m merely passing
through. Luckily for you this is no formal inspection. But
you’ve lost your lunch hour with your asinine pranks. Now
get back to your work and never let me hear of a disgraceful
incident like this again from Junior Unit Twenty-Three.”</p>

<p class="c007">He swept out with his retinue. Ross noted that some of
the younger girls were crying and that the older men and
women were glaring at him murderously.</p>

<p class="c007">“We’ll teach you manners, you pup,” the foreman-type
said. “You go on the dye vats this afternoon. Any more
trouble and you’ll miss a few meals.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross told him: “Just keep your hands off me, mister.”</p>

<p class="c007">The foreman-type expanded into a beam of pleasure. “I
thought you’d be sensible,” he said. “Everybody to the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_50">50</span>plant, now!” He collared a pretty girl of about Ross’s age.
“Helena here is working out a bit of insolence on the dye
vats herself. She’ll show you.” The girl stood with downcast
eyes. Ross liked her face and wondered about her
figure. Whatever it was like, it was covered from neck to
knee by a loose shirt. But the older women wore fitted
clothes.</p>

<p class="c007">The foreman-type led a grand procession through the
door. Helena told Ross: “I guess you’d better get in front
of me in line. I go here——” She slipped in deftly, and
Ross understood a little more of what went on here. The
procession was in order of age.</p>

<p class="c007">He had determined to drift for a day or two—not that
he seemed to have much choice. The Franklin Foundation,
supposedly having endured a good many years, would
last another week while he explored the baffling mores of
this place and found out how to circumvent them and find
his way to the keepers of F-T-L on this world. Nobody
would go anywhere with his own ship—not without first
running up a setting for the Wesley Drive!</p>

<p class="c007">The line filed into a factory whose like Ross had never
before seen. He had a fair knowledge of and eye for industrial
processes; it was clear that the place was an electric-cable
works. But why was the concrete floor dangerously
cracked and sloppily patched? Why was the big enameling
oven rumbling and stinking? Why were the rolling mills in
a far corner unsupplied with guards and big, easy-to-hit
emergency cutoffs? Why was the light bad and the air full
of lint? Why did the pickling tank fume and make the
workers around it cough hackingly? Most pointed of all,
why did the dye vats to which Helena led him stink and
slop over?</p>

<p class="c007">There were grimy signs everywhere, including the isolated
bay where braiding cord was dyed the standard code
colors. The signs said things like: AGE IS A PRIVILEGE
AND NOT A RIGHT. AGE MUST BE EARNED BY
WORK. GRATITUDE IS THE INDEX OF YOUR
PROGRESS TO MATURITY.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said girlishly as she took his arm and hooked
him out of the moving line: “Here’s Stinkville. Believe me,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_51">51</span>I’m not going to talk back again. After all, one’s maturity
is measured by one’s acceptance of one’s environment,
isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” said Ross. “Listen, Helena, have you ever heard
of a place called the Franklin Foundation?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No,” she said. “First you climb up here—golly! I don’t
even know your name.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">“All right, Ross. First you climb up here and make sure
the yarn’s running over the rollers right; sometimes it gets
twisted around and then it breaks. Then you take one of the
thermometers from the wall and you check the vat temperature.
It says right on the thermometers what it should be
for the different colors. If it’s off you turn that gas tap up
or down, just a little. Then you check the wringer rolls
where the yarn comes out. Watch your fingers when you
do! The yarn comes in different thicknesses on the same
thread so you have to adjust the wringer rolls so too much
dye doesn’t get squeezed out. You can tell by the color; it
shouldn’t be lighter after it goes through the rolls. But the
yarn shouldn’t come through sloppy and drip dye on the
floor while it travels to the bobbin——”</p>

<p class="c007">There was some more, equally uncomplicated. He took
the yellow and green vats; she took the red and blue. They
had worked in the choking stench and heat for perhaps
three hours before Ross finished one temperature check
and descended to adjust a gas tap. He found Helena, spent
and gasping, on the floor, hidden from the rest of the shop
by the bulky tanks.</p>

<p class="c007">“Heat knock you out?” he asked briskly. “Don’t try to
talk. I’ll tote you over by the wall away from the burners.
Maybe we’ll catch a little breeze from the windows there.”
She nodded weakly.</p>

<p class="c007">He picked her up without too much trouble, carried her
three yards or so to the wall, still isolated from the rest of
the shop. She was ripely curved under that loose shirt, he
learned. He set her down easily, crouching himself, and did
not take his hands away.</p>

<p class="c007">It’s been a long time, he thought—and she was responding!
Whether she knew it or not, there was a drowsy smile
<span class="pageno" id="Page_52">52</span>on her face and her body moved a little against his hands,
pleasurably. She was breathing harder.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross did the sensible thing and kissed her.</p>

<p class="c007">Wildcat!</p>

<p class="c007">Ross reeled back from her fright and anger, his face
copiously scratched. “I’m dreadfully sorry,” he sputtered.
“Please accept my sincerest——”</p>

<p class="c007">The flare-up of rage ended; she was sobbing bitterly,
leaning against the wall, wailing that nobody had ever
treated her like that before, that she’d be set back three
years if he told anybody, that she was a good, self-controlled
girl and he had no <i>right</i> to treat her that way, and
what kind of degenerate was he, not yet twenty and going
around kissing girls when <i>everybody</i> knew you went crazy
from it.</p>

<p class="c007">He soothed her—from a distance. Her sobbing dropped
to a bilious croon as she climbed the ladder to the yellow
vat, tears still on her face, and checked its temperature.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, wondering if he were already crazy from too much
kissing of girls, mechanically resumed his duties. But she
had responded. And how long had they been working? And
wasn’t this shift ever going to end?</p>

<p class="c007">All the shifts ended in time. But there was a catch to it:
There was always another shift. After the afternoon shift
on the dye vats came dinner—porridge!—and then came
the evening shift on the dye vats, and then sleep. The foreman
was lenient, though; he let Ross off the vats after the
end of the second day. Then it was kitchen orderly, and
only two shifts a day. And besides, you got plenty to eat.</p>

<p class="c007">But it was a long, long way, Ross thought sardonically to
himself, from the shining pictures he had painted to himself
back on Halsey’s Planet. Ross the explorer, Ross the hero,
Ross the savior of humanity....</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, the semipermanent KP.</p>

<p class="c007">He had to admit it to himself: The expedition thus far
had been a bust. Not only was it perfectly clear that there
no longer was a Franklin Foundation on Gemser, but more
had been lost than time and effort. For Ross himself, he
silently admitted, was as close to lost as he ever wanted to
be. He was, in effect, a prisoner, in a prison from which
<span class="pageno" id="Page_53">53</span>there was no easy escape as long as he was cursed with
youthfulness....</p>

<p class="c007">Of course, the implications of that were that there was a
perfectly easy escape in time. All he had to do was get old
enough to matter, on this insane planet. Ninety, maybe.
And then he would be perfectly free to totter out to the
spaceport, dragoon a squad of juniors into lifting him into
the ship, and take off....</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was some help. But only psychologically; she was
pleasant company, but neither she nor anyone else in the
roster of forty-eight to whom he was permitted to speak had
ever heard of the Franklin Foundation, or F-T-L travel, or
anything. Helena said, “Wait for Holiday. Maybe one of
the grownups will tell you then?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Holiday?” Ross slid back and scratched his shoulder
blades against the corner of his bed. Helena was sprawled
on the floor, half watching a projected picture on the screen
at the end of the dormitory.</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes. You’re lucky, it’s only eight days off. That’s when
Dobermann——” she pointed to the foreman——“graduates;
he’s the only one this year. And we all move up a step,
and the new classes come in, and then we all get everything
we want. Well, pretty near,” she amended. “We can’t do
anything <i>bad</i>. But you’ll see; it’s nice.”</p>

<p class="c007">Then the picture ended, and it was calisthenics time, and
then lights out. Forty-eight men and women on their forty-eight
bunks—the honor system appeared to work beautifully;
there had been no signs of sex play that Ross had
been able to see—slept the sleep of the innocent. While
Ross, the forty-ninth, lay staring into the dark with rising
hope.</p>

<p class="c007">In the kitchen the next morning he got more information
from Helena. Holiday seemed to be a cross between saturnalia
and Boy’s Week; for one day of the year the elders
slightly relaxed their grip on the reins. On that day alone
one could Speak Before Being Spoken To, Interrupt One’s
Elders, even Leave the Room without Being Excused.</p>

<p class="c007">Whee, Ross thought sourly. But still....</p>

<p class="c007">The foreman, Dobermann, once you learned how to handle
him, wasn’t such a bad guy. Ross, studying his habits,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_54">54</span>learned the proper approach and used it. Dobermann’s
commonest complaint was of irresponsibility—irresponsibility
when some thirty-year-old junior was caught sneaking
into line ahead of his proper place, irresponsibility when
Ross forgot to make his bed before stumbling out in the
dark to his kitchen shift, one awful case of irresponsibility
when Helena thoughtlessly poured cold water into the cooking
vat while it was turned on. There was a sizzle, a crackle,
and a puff of steam, and Helena was weeping over a broken
heating element.</p>

<p class="c007">Dobermann came storming over, and Ross saw his
chance. “That is very irresponsible of you, Helena,” he said
coldly, back to Dobermann but entirely conscious of his
presence. “If Junior Unit Twenty-Three was all as irresponsible
as you, it would reflect badly on Mr. Dobermann.
You don’t know how lucky you are that Mr. Dobermann
is so kind to you.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena’s weeping dried up instantly; she gave Ross one
furious glance, and lowered her eyes before Dobermann.
Dobermann nodded approvingly to Ross as he waded into
Helena; it was a memorable tirade, but Ross heard only
part of it. He was looking at the cooking vat; it was a
simple-minded bit of construction, a spiral of resistance
wire around a ceramic core. The core had cracked and one
end of the wire was loose; if it could be reconnected, the
cracked core shouldn’t matter much—the wire was covered
with insulation anyhow. He looked up and opened his
mouth to say something, then remembered and merely
stood looking brightly attentive.</p>

<p class="c007">“——looks like you want to go back to the vats,” the
foreman was finishing. “Well, Helena, if that’s what you
want we can make you happy. This time you’ll be by yourself,
too; you won’t have Ross to help you out when the
going’s rough. Will she, Ross?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No, sir,” Ross said immediately. “Sir?”</p>

<p class="c007">Dobermann looked back at him, frowning. “What?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I think I can fix this,” Ross said modestly.</p>

<p class="c007">Dobermann’s eyes bulged. “Fix it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, sir. It’s only a loose wire. Back where I come from,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_55">55</span>we all learned how to take care of things like that when we
were still in school. It’s just a matter of——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Now, hold on, Ross”; the foreman howled. “Tampering
with a machine is bad enough, but if you’re going to turn
out to be a liar, too, you’re going just too far! School, indeed!
You know perfectly well, Ross, that even I won’t
be ready for school until after Holiday. Ross, I knew you
were a troublemaker, knew it the first day I set eyes on you.
School! Well, we’ll see how you like the school I’m going
to send you to!”</p>

<p class="c007">The vats weren’t so bad the second time. Even though
the porridge was cold for two days, until somebody got
around to delivering a different though equally worn-out
cooking vat.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena passed out from the heat three times. And when,
on the third time, Ross, goaded beyond endurance, kissed
her again, there were no hysterics.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_56">56</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 6"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 6</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">FROM birth to puberty you were an infant.
From puberty to Dobermann’s age, a junior. For ten
years after that you went to school, learning the things you
had neither the need nor the right to know before.</p>

<p class="c007">And then you were Of Age.</p>

<p class="c007">Being Of Age meant much, much more than voting, Ross
found out. For one thing, it meant freedom to marry—after
the enforced sexlessness of the junior years and the
directed breeding via artificial insemination of the Scholars.
It meant a healthy head start on seniority, which carried
with it all offices and all power.</p>

<p class="c007">It meant freedom.</p>

<p class="c007">As a bare beginning, it meant the freedom to command
any number of juniors or scholars. On Ross’s last punitive
day in the dye vats, a happy ancient commandeered the entire
staff to help set shrubs in his front lawn—a good dozen
acres of careful landscaping it was, and the prettiest sight
Ross had seen on this ugly planet.</p>

<p class="c007">When they got back to the dye vats, the yellow and blue
had boiled over, and broken strands of yarn had fouled
all the bobbins. Dobermann raged—at the juniors.</p>

<p class="c007">But then Dobermann’s raging came to an end forever.
It was the night before Holiday, and there was a pretty ceremony
as he packed his kit and got ready to turn Junior Unit
<span class="pageno" id="Page_57">57</span>Twenty-three over to his successor. Everyone was scrubbed,
and though a certain amount of license in regard to neatness
was allowed between dinner and lights out, each
bunk was made and carefully smoothed free of wrinkles.
After half an hour of fidgety waiting, Dobermann called—needlessly—for
attention, and the minister came in with
his ancient retinue.</p>

<p class="c007">The rich mechanical voice boomed out from his breastplate:
“Junior Dobermann, today you are a man!”</p>

<p class="c007">Dobermann stood with his head bowed, silent and content.
Junior Unit Twenty-Three chanted antiphonally:
“Good-by, Junior Dobermann!”</p>

<p class="c007">The retinue took three steps forward, and the minister
boomed, “Beauty comes with age. Age is beauty!”</p>

<p class="c007">And the chorus: “Old heads are wisest!” Ross, standing
as straight as any of them, faked the words with his lips
and tongue, and wondered how many repetitions had drilled
those sentiments into Junior Unit Twenty-Three.</p>

<p class="c007">There were five more chants, and five responses, and
then the minister and his court of four were standing next
to Dobermann. Breathing heavily from his exertions, the
minister reached behind him and took a book from the
hands of the nearest of his retinue. He said, panting,
“Scholar Dobermann, in the Book lies the words of the
Fathers. Read them and learn.”</p>

<p class="c007">The chorus cried thrice, “The Word of the Fathers Is
Law.” And then the minister touched Dobermann’s hand,
and in solemn silence, left.</p>

<p class="c007">As soon as the elders had gone, the juniors flocked
around Dobermann to wish him well. There was excited
laughter in the congratulations, and a touch of apprehension
too: Dobermann, with all his faults, was a known
quantity, and the members of Junior Unit Twenty-Three
were beginning to look a little fearfully at the short, redheaded
youth who, from the next day on, would be Dobermann’s
successor.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross promised himself: He can be good or bad, a blessing
or a problem. But he won’t be <i>my</i> problem. I’m getting
out of here tomorrow!</p>

<p class="c007">Holiday.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_58">58</span>“Oh, it’s fun,” Helena told him enthusiastically. “First
you get up early to get the voting out of the way——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Voting?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure. Don’t they vote where you come from? I thought
everybody voted. That’s democracy, like we have it here.”</p>

<p class="c007">He sardonically quoted one of the omnipresent wall
signs: “THE HAPPINESS OF THE MAJORITY
MEANS THE HAPPINESS OF THE MINORITY.” He
had often wondered what, if anything, it meant. But Helena
solemnly nodded.</p>

<p class="c007">They were whispering from their adjoining cots by dim,
false dawn filtering through the windows on Holiday morning.
They were not the only whisperers. Things were relaxing
already.</p>

<p class="c007">“Ross,” Helena said.</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I thought maybe you might not know. On Holiday if
you, ah, want to do that again you don’t have to wait until
I faint. Ah, of course you don’t do it right out in the open.”
Overcome by her own daring she buried her head under
the coarse blanket.</p>

<p class="c007">Fine, thought Ross wearily. Once a year—or did Holiday
come once a year?—the kids were allowed to play
“Spin The Bottle.” No doubt their elders thought it was
too cute for words: mere tots of thirty and thirty-five
childishly and innocently experimenting with sex. Of course
it would be discreetly supervised so that nobody would
Get In Trouble.</p>

<p class="c007">He was quite sure Helena’s last two faints had been unconvincing
phonies.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">The wake-up whistle blew at last. The chattering members
of Junior Unit Twenty-Three dawdled while they
dressed, and the new foreman indulgently passed out shabby,
smutted ribbons which the girls tied in their hair. They
had sugar on their mush for breakfast, and Ross’s stomach
came near turning as he heard burbles of gratitude at the
feast.</p>

<p class="c007">With pushing and a certain amount of inexpert horseplay
they formed a column of fours and hiked from the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_59">59</span>hall—from the whole factory complex, indeed, along a
rubberized highway.</p>

<p class="c007">Once you got out of the factory area things became
pleasanter by the mile. Hortatory roadside signs thinned
out and vanished. Stinking middens of industrial waste
were left behind. And then the landscape was rolling,
sodded acres with the road pleasantly springy underfoot,
the air clean and crisp.</p>

<p class="c007">They oohed and aahed at houses glimpsed occasionally
in the distance—always rambling, one-story affairs that
looked spanking-new.</p>

<p class="c007">Once a car overhauled them on the highway and slowed
to a crawl. It was a huge thing, richly upholstered within.
A pair of grimlooking youths were respectively chauffeur
and footman; the passenger waved at the troop from Junior
Twenty-Three and grinned out of a fantastic landscape of
wrinkles. Ross gaped. Had he thought the visiting minister
was old? This creature, male or female, was <i>old</i>.</p>

<p class="c007">After the car sped on, to the cheers of the marchers,
there was happy twittering speculation. Junior Twenty-Three
didn’t recognize the Citizen who had graciously
waved to them, but they thought he—or she?—was wonderful.
So dignified, so distinguished, so learned, so gracious,
so democratic!</p>

<p class="c007">“Wasn’t it sweet of him?” Helena burbled. “And I’m sure
he must be somebody important connected with the voting,
otherwise he’d just vote from home.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s feet were beginning to hurt when they reached the
suburban center. To the best of his recollection, they were
no more than eight or ten kilos from the field and his starship.
Backtrack on the road to the suburban center about
three kilos, take the fork to the right, and that would be
that.</p>

<p class="c007">Junior Twenty-Three reached a pitch of near-ecstasy
marveling at the low, spacious buildings of the center.
Through sweeping, transparent windows they saw acres of
food and clothing in the shopping center; the Drive-In
Theater was an architectural miracle. The Civic Center almost
finished them off, with its statue of Equal Justice
Under the Law (a dignified beldame whose chin and nose
<span class="pageno" id="Page_60">60</span>almost met, leaning on a gem-crusted crutch) and Civic
Virtue (in a motorized wheelchair equipped with an emergency
oxygen tent, Lindbergh-Carrel auxiliary blood pump
and an artificial kidney).</p>

<p class="c007">Merry oldsters were everywhere in their cars and wheelchairs,
gaily waving at the kids. Only one untoward incident
marred their prevoting tour of inspection. A thick-headed
young man mistakenly called out a cheerful: “Life
and wisdom, ma’am!” to a beaming oldster.</p>

<p class="c007">“Ma’am, is it?” the oldster roared through his throat
mike and amplifier in an unmistakable baritone. “I’ll
ma’am you, you wise punk!” He spun his wheelchair on a
decishield, threw it into high and roared down on the
offender, running him over. The boy covered himself as
well as he could while the raging old man backed over him
again and ran over him again. His ordeal ended when the
oldster collapsed forward in the chair, hanging from his
safety belt.</p>

<p class="c007">The boy got up with tire marks on him and groaned:
“Oh, lord! I’ve hurt him.” He appealed hysterically:
“What’ll I do? Is he dead?”</p>

<p class="c007">Another Senior Citizen buzzed up and snapped: “Cut in
his L-C heart, you booby!”</p>

<p class="c007">The boy turned on the Lindbergh-Carrel pump, trembling.
The white-faced juniors of Twenty-Three watched as
the tubes to the oldster’s left arm throbbed and pulsed. A
massive sigh went up when the old man’s eyes opened and
he sat up groggily. “What happened?”</p>

<p class="c007">“You died again, Sherrington,” said the other elder.
“Third time this week—good thing there was a responsible
person around. Now get over to the medical center this
minute and have a complete checkup. Hear me?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, Dad,” Sherrington said weakly. He rolled off in
low gear.</p>

<p class="c007">His father turned to the youngster who stood vacantly
rubbing the tire marks on his face. “Since it’s Holiday,” he
grated, “I’ll let this pass. On any other day I would have
seen to it that you were set back fifteen years for your disgraceful
negligence.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross knew by then what that meant, and shuddered with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_61">61</span>the rest. It amounted to a death sentence, did fifteen additional
years of the grinding toil and marginal diet of a
junior.</p>

<p class="c007">Somewhat dampened they proceeded to the Hall of
Democracy, a glittering place replete with slogans, statues,
and heroic portraits of the heroic aged. Twenty-Three huddled
together as it joined with a stream of juniors from the
area’s other factory units. Most of them were larger than
the cable works; many of them, apparently, involved more
wearing and hazardous occupations. Some groups coughed
incessantly and were red-eyed from the irritation of some
chemical. Others must have been heavy-manual-labor specialists.
They were divided into the hale, whose muscles
bulged amazingly, and the dying—men and women who
obviously could not take the work but who were doing it
anyway.</p>

<p class="c007">They seated themselves at long benches, with push buttons
at each station. Helena, next to him, explained the
system to Ross. Voting was universal and simultaneous, in
all the Halls of Democracy around the planet and from all
the homes of the Senior Citizens who did not choose to
vote from a Hall. Simultaneously the votes were counted
at a central station and the results were flashed to screens
in the Centers and homes. She said a number of enthusiastic
things about Democracy while Ross studied a sheet on
which the candidates and propositions were listed.</p>

<p class="c007">The names meant nothing to him. He noted only that
each of three candidates for Chief of State was one hundred
thirty years old, that each of three candidates for First Assistant
Chief was one hundred and twenty-seven years old,
and so on. Obviously the nominating conventions by agreement
named candidates of the same age for each office to
keep it a contest.</p>

<p class="c007">Proposition One read: “To dismantle seven pediatric
centers and apply the salvage value to the construction of,
and the funds no longer required for their maintenance to
the maintenance of, a new wing of the Gerontological Center,
said wing to be devoted to basic research in the extension
of human life.”</p>

<p class="c007">Proposition Two was worse. Ross didn’t bother to read
<span class="pageno" id="Page_62">62</span>the rest of them. He whispered hoarsely to Helena, “What
next?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Ssh!” She pointed to a screen at the front of the Hall.
“It’s starting.”</p>

<p class="c007">A Senior Citizen of a very high rank (his face was entirely
hidden by an oxygen mask) was speaking from the
screen. There was what seemed to be a ritual speech of invocation,
then he got down to business. “Citizens,” he said
through his throat mike, “behold Democracy in Action! I
give you three candidates for Chief of State—look them
over, and make up your minds. First, Citizen Raphael
Flexner, age one century, three decades, seven months,
ten days.” Senior Citizen Flexner rolled on screen, spoke
briefly through his throat mike and rolled off. The first
speaker said again, “Behold Democracy in Action! See
now Citizen Sheridan Farnsworth, age one century, three
decades, ten months, forty-two days.” Applause boomed
louder; some of the younger juniors yelled hysterically and
drummed their heels on the floor.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was panting with excitement, eyes bright on the
screen. “Isn’t it <i>wonderful</i>?” she gasped ecstatically. “Oh,
look at <i>him</i>!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Him” was the third candidate, and the first oldster
Ross had seen whose gocart was a wheeled stretcher. Prone
and almost invisible through the clusters of tubing and
chromed equipment, Senior Citizen Immanuel Appleby
acknowledged his introduction—“Age one century, three
decades, eleven months and five days!” The crowd went
mad; Helena broke from Ross’s side and joined a long
yelling snake dance through the corridors.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross yelled experimentally as protective coloration, then
found himself yelling because everybody was yelling, because
he couldn’t help it. By the time the speaker on the
screen began to call for order, Ross was standing on top
of the voting bench and screaming his head off.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena, weeping with excitement, tugged at his leg.
“Vote now, Ross,” she begged, and all over the hall the
cry was “Vote! Vote!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross reached out for the voting buttons. “What do we
do now?” he asked Helena.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_63">63</span>“Push the button marked ‘Appleby,’ of course. Hurry!”</p>

<p class="c007">“But why Appleby?” Ross objected. “That fellow Flexner,
for instance——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Hush, Ross! Somebody might be listening.” There was
sickening fright on Helena’s face. “Didn’t you hear? We
<i>have</i> to vote for the best man. ‘Oldest Is Bestest,’ you know.
That’s what Democracy <i>means</i>, the freedom of choice.
They read us the ages, and we choose which is oldest. Now
please, Ross, hurry before somebody starts asking questions!”</p>

<p class="c007">The voting was over, and the best man had won in
every case. It was a triumph for informed public opinion.
The mob poured out of the hall in happy-go-lucky order,
all precedences and formalities suspended for Holiday.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena grasped Ross firmly by the arm. The crowd was
spreading over the quiet acres surrounding the Center,
each little cluster heedlessly intent on a long-planned project
of its own. Under the pressure of Helena’s arm, Ross
found himself swerving toward a clump of shrubbery.</p>

<p class="c007">He said violently, “No! That is, I mean I’m sorry,
Helena, but I’ve got something to do.”</p>

<p class="c007">She stared at him with shock in her eyes. “On Holiday?”</p>

<p class="c007">“On Holiday. Truly, Helena, I’m sorry. Look, what you
said last night—from now till tomorrow morning, I can do
what I want, right?”</p>

<p class="c007">Sullenly, “Yes. I <i>thought</i>, Ross, that I <i>knew</i> what——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Okay.” He jerked his arm away, feeling like all of the
hundred possible kinds of a skunk. “See you around,” he
said over his shoulder. He did not look back.</p>

<p class="c007">Three kilos back, he told himself firmly, then the right-hand
fork in the road. And not more than a dozen kilos,
at the most, to the spaceport. He could do it in a couple of
hours.</p>

<p class="c007">One thing had been established for certain: If ever there
had been a “Franklin Foundation” on this planet, it was
gone for good now. Dismantled, no doubt, to provide
building materials for an eartrumpet plant. No doubt the
little F-T-L ship that the Franklin Foundation was supposed
to cover for was still swinging in an orbit within
easy range of the spaceport; but the chance that anybody
<span class="pageno" id="Page_64">64</span>would ever find it, or use it if found, was pretty close to
zero. If they bothered to maintain a radar watch at all—any
other watch than the fully automatic one set to respond
only to highvelocity interstellar ships—and if anyone ever
took time to look at the radar plot, no doubt the F-T-L ship
was charted. As an asteroid, satellite, derelict or “body of
unknown origin.” Certainly no one of these smug oldsters
would take the trouble to investigate.</p>

<p class="c007">The only problem to solve on this planet was how to
get off it—fast.</p>

<p class="c007">On the road ahead of him was what appeared to be a
combination sex orgy and free-for-all. It rolled in a yelling,
milling mob of half a hundred excited juniors across the
road toward him, then swerved into the fields as a cluster
of screaming women broke free and ran, and the rest of
the crowd roared after them.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross quickened his step. If he ever did get off this planet,
it would have to be today; he was not fool enough to think
that any ordinary day would give him the freedom to poke
around the spaceport’s defenses. And it would be just his
luck, he thought bitterly, to get involved in a gang fight
on the way to the port.</p>

<p class="c007">There was a squeal of tires behind him, and a little vehicle
screeched to a halt. Ross threw up a defensive arm
in automatic reflex.</p>

<p class="c007">But it was only Helena, awkwardly fumbling open the
door of the car. “Get in,” she said sourly. “You’ve spoiled
<i>my</i> Holiday. Might as well do what <i>you</i> want to do.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">“What’s that?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena looked where he was pointing, and shrugged.
“Guard box,” she guessed. “How would I know? Nobody’s
in it, anyhow.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross nodded. They had abandoned the car and were
standing outside a long, seamless fence that surrounded
the spaceport. The main gates were closed and locked; a
few hundred feet to the right was a smaller gate with a sort
of pillbox, but that had every appearance of being locked
too.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_65">65</span>“All right,” said Ross. “See that shed with the boxes
outside it? Over we go.”</p>

<p class="c007">The shed was right up against the fence; the metal boxes
gave a sort of rough and just barely climbable foothold.
Helena was easy enough to lift to the top of the shed; Ross,
grunting, managed to clamber after her.</p>

<p class="c007">They looked down at the ground on the other side, a
dozen feet away. “You don’t have to come along,” Ross
told her.</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s just <i>like</i> you!” she flared. “Cast me aside—trample
on me!”</p>

<p class="c007">“All right, all right.” Ross looked around, but neither
junior nor elder was anywhere in sight. “Hang by your
hands and then drop,” he advised her. “Get moving before
somebody shows up.”</p>

<p class="c007">“On Holiday?” she asked bitterly. She squirmed over
the narrow top of the fence, legs dangling, let herself
down as far as she could, and let go. Ross watched anxiously,
but she got up quickly enough and moved to one
side.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross plopped down next to her, knocking the wind out
of himself. He got up dizzily.</p>

<p class="c007">His ship, in lonesome quiet, was less than a quarter of a
mile away. “Let’s go,” Ross panted, and clutched her
hand. They skirted another shed and were in the clear,
running as fast as they could.</p>

<p class="c007">Almost in the clear.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross heard the whine of the little scooter before he felt
the blow, but it was too late. He sprawled on the ground,
dragging Helena after him.</p>

<p class="c007">A Senior Citizen with a long-handled rod of the sort
Ross remembered all too well was scowling down at them.
“Children,” he rumbled through his breast-speaker in a
voice of awful disgust, “is this the way to act on Holiday?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena, gibbering in terror, was beyond words. Ross
croaked, “Sorry, sir. We—we were just——”</p>

<p class="c007">Crash! The rod came down again, and every muscle in
Ross’s body convulsed. He rolled helplessly away, the elder
following him. Crash! “We give you Holiday,” the elder
boomed, “and——” crash “——you act like animals.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_66">66</span>Terrible! Don’t you know that freedom of play on Holiday——”
crash “——is the most sacred right of every
junior——” crash “——and heaven help you——” crash
“——if you abuse it!”</p>

<p class="c007">The wrenching punishment and the caressing voice
stopped together. Ross lay blinking into the terrible silence
that followed. He became conscious of Helena’s weeping,
and forced his head to turn to look at her.</p>

<p class="c007">She was standing behind the elder’s scooter, a length of
wire in her hand. The senior lay slumped against his safety
strap. “Ross!” she moaned. “Ross, what have I done? <i>I
turned him off!</i>”</p>

<p class="c007">He stood up, coughing and retching. No one else was
in sight, only the two of them and the silent, slack form of
the old man. He grabbed her arm. “Come on,” he said
fuzzily, and started toward the starship.</p>

<p class="c007">She hung back, mumbling to herself, her eyes saucers.
She was in a state of grievous shock, it was clear.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross hesitated, rubbing his back. He knew that she
might never pull out of it. Even if she did, she was certain
to be a frightful handicap. But it was crystal-clear that she
had declared herself on his side. Even if the elder could be
revived, the punishment in store for Helena would be awful
to contemplate....</p>

<p class="c007">Come what may, he was now responsible for Helena.</p>

<p class="c007">He towed her to the starship. She climbed in docilely
enough, sat staring blankly as he sealed ship and sent it
blasting off the face of the planet.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">She didn’t speak until they were well into deep space.
Then the blank stare abruptly clouded and she exploded
in a fit of tears. Ross said ineffectually, “There, there.” It
had no effect; until, in its own time, the storm ended.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said hoarsely, “Wh-what do I do now?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Why, I guess you come right along with me,” Ross said
heartily, cursing his luck.</p>

<p class="c007">“Where’s that?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Where? You mean, where?” Ross scratched his head.
“Well, let’s see. Frankly, Helena, your planet was quite a
disappointment to me. I had hoped——Well, no matter.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_67">67</span>I suppose the best thing to do is to look up the next planet
on the list.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What list?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross hesitated, then shrugged and plunged into the explanation.
All about the longliners and the message and
faster-than-light travel and the Wesley Families—and none
of it, while he was talking, seemed convincing at all. But
perhaps Helena was less critical; or perhaps Helena simply
did not care. She listened attentively and made no comment.
She only said, at the end, “What’s the name of the
next planet?”</p>

<p class="c007">He consulted the master charts. Haarland’s listing
showed a place called Azor, conveniently near at hand in
the strange geodesics of the Wesley Effect, where the far
galaxies might be near at hand in the warped space-lines,
and the void just beyond the viewplates be infinitely distant.
The F-T-L family of Azor was named Cavallo; when
last heard from, they had been builders of machine tools.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross told Helena about it. She shrugged and watched
curiously as he began to set up the F-T-L problem on the
huge board.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_68">68</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 7"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 7</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THEY were well within detection range
of Azor’s radar, if any, and yet there had been no beeping
signal that the planet’s GCA had taken over and would
pilot them down. Another blank? He studied the surface
of the world under his highest magnification and saw no
signs that it had been devastated by war. There were
cities—intact, as far as he could tell, but not very attractive.
The design ran to huge, gloomy piles that mounted toward
central towers.</p>

<p class="c007">Azor was a big world which showed not much water
and a great deal of black rock. It was the fifth of its system
and reportedly had colonized its four adjacent neighbors
and their moons.</p>

<p class="c007">His own search radar pinged. The signal was followed at
once by a guarded voice from his ship-to-ship communicator:
“What ship are you? Do you receive me? The band is
798.44.”</p>

<p class="c007">He hastily dialed the frequency on his transmitter and
called, “I receive you. We are a vessel from outside your
solar system, home planet Halsey. We want to contact a
family named Cavallo of the planet Azor believed to be
engaged in building machine tools. Can you help us?”</p>

<p class="c007">“You are a male?” the voice asked cautiously. “In command
or simply the communicator?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_69">69</span>“I’m a male and I’m in command of this vessel.”</p>

<p class="c007">The voice said: “Then sheer off this system and go elsewhere,
my friend.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What is this? Who are you?”</p>

<p class="c007">“My name does not matter. I happen to be on watch
aboard the prison orbital station ‘Minerva.’ Get going, my
friend, before the planetary GCA picks you up.”</p>

<p class="c007">Prison orbital station? A very sensible idea. “Thanks for
the advice,” he parried. “Can you tell me anything about
the Cavallo family?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I have heard of them. My friend, your time is running
out. If you do not sheer off very soon they will land you.
And I judge from the tone of your voice that it will not
be long before you join the rest of us criminals aboard
‘Minerva.’ It is not pleasant here. Good-by.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Wait, please!” Ross had no intention at all of committing
any crimes that would land him aboard a prison
hulk, and he had every intention of fulfilling his mission.
“Tell me about the Cavallo family—and why you expect
me to get in trouble on Azor.”</p>

<p class="c007">“The time is running out, my friend, but—the Cavallo
family of machine tool builders is located in Novj Grad.
And the crime of which all of us aboard ‘Minerva’ were
convicted is conspiracy to advocate equality of the sexes.
Now go!”</p>

<p class="c007">The carrier-wave hum of the communicator died, but
immediately there was another electronic noise to fill the
cabin—the beep of a GCA radar taking over the sealed
landing controls of the craft.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena had been listening with very little comprehension.
“Who was your friend, Ross?” she asked. “Where
are we?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I think,” Ross said, “he <i>was</i> my friend. And I think
we are—in trouble.”</p>

<p class="c007">The ship began to jet tentative bursts of reaction mass,
nosing toward the big, gloomy planet.</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s all right,” Helena said comfortably. “At least
they won’t know I disconnected a Senior Citizen.” She
thought a moment. “They won’t, will they? I mean, the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_70">70</span>Senior Citizens here won’t know about the Senior Citizens
there, will they?”</p>

<p class="c007">He tried to break it to her gently as the ship picked up
speed. “Helena, it’s possible that the old people here won’t
be Senior Citizens—not in your planet’s sense. They may
just be old people, with no special authority over young
people. I think, in fact, that we may find you outranking
older people who happen to be males.”</p>

<p class="c007">She took it as a joke. “You are funny, Ross. Old means
Senior, doesn’t it? And Senior means better, wiser, abler,
and in charge, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“We’ll see,” he said thoughtfully as the main reaction
drive cut in. “We’ll see very shortly.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">The spaceport was bustling, busy, and efficient. Ross
marveled at the speed and dexterity with which the anonymous
ground operator whipped his ship into a braking orbit
and set it down. And he stared enviously at the crawling
clamshells on treads, bigger than houses, that cupped
around his ship; the ship was completely and hermetically
surrounded, and bathed in a mist of germicides and prophylactic
rays.</p>

<p class="c007">A helmeted figure riding a little platform on the inside
of one of the clamshells turned a series of knobs, climbed
down, and rapped on the ship’s entrance port.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross opened it diffidently, and almost strangled in the
antiseptic fumes. Helena choked and wheezed behind him
as the figure threw back its helmet and said, “Where’s the
captain?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I am he,” said Ross meticulously. “I would like to be
put in touch with the Cavallo Machine-Tool Company of
Novj Grad.”</p>

<p class="c007">The figure shook its long hair loose, which provided Ross
with the necessary clue: it was a woman. Not a very attractive-looking
woman, for she wore no makeup; but by
the hair, by the brows and by the smoothness of her chin,
a woman all the same. She said coldly, “If you’re the captain,
who’s that?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said in a small voice, “I’m Helena, from Junior
Unit Twenty-Three.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_71">71</span>“Indeed.” Suddenly the woman smiled. “Well, come
ashore, dear,” she said. “You must be tired from your
trip. Both of you come ashore,” she added graciously.</p>

<p class="c007">She led the way out of the clamshells to a waiting closed
car. Azor’s sun had an unpleasant bluish cast to it, not a
type-G at all; Ross thought that the lighting made the woman
look uglier than she really had to be. Even Helena
looked pinched and bloodless, which he knew well was
not the case at all.</p>

<p class="c007">All around them was activity. Whatever this planet’s
faults, it was not a stagnant home for graybeards. Ross,
craning, saw nothing that was shoddy, nothing that would
have looked out of place in the best-equipped port of
Halsey’s Planet. And the reception lounge, or whatever it
was, that the woman took them to was a handsome and
prettily furnished construction. “Some lunch?” the woman
asked, directing her attention to Helena. “A cup of tribrew,
maybe? Let me have the boy bring some.” Helena looked
to Ross for signals, and Ross, gritting his teeth, nodded
to her to agree. Too young the last time, too male this
time; was there ever going to be a planet where he mattered
to anyone?</p>

<p class="c007">He said desperately, “Madam, forgive my interruption,
but this lady and myself need urgently to get in touch with
the Cavallo company. Is this Novj Grad?”</p>

<p class="c007">The woman’s pale brows arched. She said, with an effort,
“No, it is not.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Then can you tell us where Novj Grad is?” Ross persisted.
“If they have a spaceport, we can hop over there
in our ship——”</p>

<p class="c007">The woman gasped something that sounded like, “Well!”
She stood up and said pointedly to Helena, “If you’ll excuse
me, I have something to attend to.” And swept out.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena stared wide-eyed at Ross. “She must’ve been a
real Senior Citizen, huh?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Not exactly,” said Ross despairingly. “Look, Helena,
things are different here. I need your help.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Help?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, help!” he bellowed. “Get a grip on yourself, girl.
Remember what I told you about the planet I came from?
<span class="pageno" id="Page_72">72</span>It was different from yours, remember? The old people
were just like anybody else.” She giggled in embarrassment.
“They were!” he yelled. “And they are here, too.
Old people, young people, doesn’t matter. On my planet,
the richest people were—well, never mind. On this planet,
women are the bosses. Get it? Women are like elders. So
you’ll have to take over, Helena.”</p>

<p class="c007">She was looking at him with a puzzled frown. She objected,
“But if women are——”</p>

<p class="c007">“They are. Never mind about that part of it now; just
remember that for the purposes of getting along here,
you’re going to be my boss. You tell me what to do. You
talk to everybody. And what you have to say to them is
this: You must get to Novj Grad immediately, and talk
to a high-ranking member of the Cavallo Machine-Tool
Company. Clear? Once we get there, I’ll take over; everything
will be under control then.” He added prayerfully,
“I hope.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena blinked at him. “I’m going to be your boss?”
she asked.</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s right.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Like an elder bosses a junior? And it’s legal?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross started to repeat, “That’s right,” impatiently again.
But there was a peculiar look in Helena’s round eyes.
“Helena!” he said warningly.</p>

<p class="c007">She was all concern. “Why, what is it, Ross?” she asked
solicitously. “You look upset. Just leave everything to me,
dear.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">They got started on the way to Novj Grad—not in their
ship (the woman had said there was no spaceport in Novj
Grad), and not alone, so that Ross could not confirm his
unhappy opinion of Helena’s inner thoughts. But at least
they were on their way to Novj Grad in the Azorian
equivalent of a chartered aircraft, with Helena chatting
happily with the female pilot, and Ross sitting uncomfortably
on a narrow, upholstered strip behind.</p>

<p class="c007">Everything he saw in Azor confirmed his first impressions.
The planet was busy and prosperous. Nobody
seemed to be doing anything very productive, he thought,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_73">73</span>but somehow everything seemed to get done. Automatic
machinery, he guessed; if women were to have any chance
of gaining the upper hand on a planet, most of the hard
physical work would have to be fairly well mechanized
anyhow. And particularly on this planet. They had been
flying for six hours, at a speed he guessed to be not much
below that of sound, and fully half of the territory they
passed over was bare, black rock.</p>

<p class="c007">The ship began losing altitude, and the pilot, who had
been curled up in a relaxed position, totally ignoring the
aircraft, glanced at her instrument panel. “Coming in for
a landing,” she warned. “Don’t distract me right now,
dear, I’ve got a thousand things to do.”</p>

<p class="c007">She didn’t seem to be doing any of them, Ross thought
disapprovingly; all she did was watch varicolored lights
blink on and off. But no doubt the ship landing, too, was
as automatic as the piloting.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena turned and leaned back to Ross. “We’re coming
in for a landing,” she relayed.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said sourly, “I heard.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena gave him a look of reprimand and forgiveness.
“I’m hungry,” she mused.</p>

<p class="c007">The pilot turned from her controls. “You can get something
at the airport,” she offered eagerly. “I’ll show you.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena looked at Ross. “Would you like something?”</p>

<p class="c007">But the pilot frowned. “I don’t believe there’s any place
for men,” she said disapprovingly. “Perhaps we can get
something sent out for him if you like. Although, really,
it’s probably against the rules, you know.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross started to say with great dignity, “Thank you, but
that won’t be necessary.” But he didn’t quite get it out.
The ship came in for its landing. There was an enormous
jolt and a squawk of alarm bells and flashing lights. The
ship careened crazily, and stopped.</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, darn,” complained the pilot mildly. “It’s always
doing that. Come on, dear, let’s get something to eat.
We’ll come back for <i>him</i> later.”</p>

<p class="c007">And Ross was left alone to stare apprehensively at the
unceasingly flashing lights and to listen to the strident
alarms for three-quarters of an hour.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_74">74</span>His luck was in, though. The ship didn’t explode. And
eventually a pallid young man in a greasy apron appeared
with a tray of sandwiches and a vacuum jug.</p>

<p class="c007">“Up here, boy,” Ross called.</p>

<p class="c007">He gaped through the port. “You mean come in?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure. It’s all right.”</p>

<p class="c007">The young man put down the tray. Something in the
way he looked at it prompted Ross to invite him: “Have
some with me? More here than I can handle.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Thanks; I believe I will. I, uh, was supposed to take
my break after I brought you this stuff.” He poured steaming
brew into the cup that covered the jug, politely pushed
it to Ross and swigged from the jug himself. “You’re with
the starship?” he asked, around a mouthful of sandwich.</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes. I—the captain, that is—wants to contact an outfit
called Cavallo Machine-Tool. You know where they
are?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure. Biggest firm on the south side. Fifteen Street;
you can’t miss them. The captain—is she the lady who
was with Pilot Breuer?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="c007">The youngster’s eyes widened. “You mean you were in
space—alone—with a lady?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross nodded and chewed.</p>

<p class="c007">“And she didn’t—uh—there wasn’t—well—any problem?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No,” said Ross. “You have much trouble with that
kind of thing?”</p>

<p class="c007">The boy winced. “If I’ve asked once I’ve asked a hundred
times for a transfer. Oh, those jet pilots! I used to
work in a roadside truck stop. I know truckers are supposed
to be rough and tough; maybe they are. But you
can’t tell me that deep down a trucker isn’t a lady. When
you tell them no, that’s that. But a pilot—it just eggs them
on. Azor City today, Novj Grad tomorrow—what do they
care?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross was fascinated and baffled. It seemed to him that
they should care and care plenty. Back where he came
from, it was the woman who paid and he couldn’t imagine
any cultural setup which could alter that biological fact.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_75">75</span>He asked cautiously: “Have you ever been—in trouble?”</p>

<p class="c007">The boy stiffened and looked disapproving. Then he
said with a sigh: “I might as well tell you. It’s all over the
station anyway; they call me ‘Bernie the Pullover.’ Yes.
Twice. Pilots both times. I can’t seem to say no——” He
took another long pull from the jug and a savage bite
from a second sandwich.</p>

<p class="c007">“I’m sure,” Ross said numbly, “it wasn’t your fault.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Try telling that to the judge,” Bernie the Pullover said
bitterly. “The pilot speaks her piece, the medic puts the
blood group tests in evidence, the doctor and crèche director
depose that the child was born and is still living.
Then the judge says, without even looking up, ‘Paternity
judgment to the plaintiff, defendant ordered to pay one
thousand credits annual support, let this be a warning to
you, young man, next case.’ I shouldn’t have joined you
and eaten your sandwiches, but the fact is I was hungry.
I had to sell my meal voucher yesterday to meet my payment.
Miss three payments and——” He jerked his thumb
heavenward.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross thought and realized that the thumb must indicate
the orbiting prison hulk “Minerva.” It <i>was</i> the man who
paid here.</p>

<p class="c007">He demanded: “How did all this happen?”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie, having admitted his hunger, had stopped stalling
and seized a third sandwich. “All what?” he asked indistinctly.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross thought hard and long. He realized first that he
could probably never explain what he meant to Bernie,
and second that if he did they’d probably both wind up
aboard “Minerva” for conspiracy to advocate equality.
He shifted his ground. “Of course everybody agrees on
the natural superiority of women,” he said, “but people
seem to differ from planet to planet as to the reasons.
What do they say here on Azor?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh—nothing special or fancy. Just the common-sense,
logical thing. They’re smaller, for one thing, and haven’t
got the muscles of men, so they’re natural supervisors.
They accumulate money as a matter of course because
men die younger and women are the beneficiaries. Then,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_76">76</span>women have a natural aptitude for all the interesting jobs.
I saw a broadcast about that just the other night. The biggest
specialist on the planet in vocational aptitude. I forget
her name, but she proved it conclusively.”</p>

<p class="c007">He looked at the empty platter before them. “I’ve got
to go now. Thanks for everything.”</p>

<p class="c007">“The pleasure was mine.” Ross watched his undernourished
figure head for the station. He swore a little, and
then buckled down to some hard thinking. Helena was his
key to this world. He’d have to have a long skull-session
or two with her; he couldn’t be constantly prompting her
or there would be serious trouble. She would be the front
and he would be the very inconspicuous brains of the outfit,
trailing humbly behind. But was she capable of absorbing
a brand-new, rather complicated concept? She seemed
to be, he told himself uncomfortably, in love with him.
That would help considerably....</p>

<p class="c007">Helena and Pilot Breuer showed up, walking with a
languor that suggested a large and pleasant meal disposed
of. Helena’s first words disposed with shocking speed of
Ross’s doubts that she was able to acquire a brand-new
sociological concept. They were: “Ah, there you are, my
dear. Did the boy bring you something or other to eat?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes. Thanks. Very thoughtful of you,” he said pointedly,
with one eye on Breuer’s reaction. There was none;
he seemed to have struck the right note.</p>

<p class="c007">“Pilot Breuer,” said Helena blandly, “thinks I’d enjoy
an evening doing the town with her and a few friends.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But the Cavallo people——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Ross,” she said gently, “don’t <i>nag</i>.”</p>

<p class="c007">He shut up. And thought: wait until I get her out into
space. <i>If</i> I get her out into space. She’d be a damned fool
to leave this wacked-up culture....</p>

<p class="c007">Breuer was saying, with an altogether too-innocent air,
“I’d better get you two settled in a hotel for the night; then
I’ll pick up Helena and a few friends and we’ll show her
what old Novj Grad has to offer in the way of night life.
Can’t have her batting around the universe saying Azor’s
sidewalks are rolled up at 2100, can we? And then she can
<span class="pageno" id="Page_77">77</span>do her trading or whatever it is with Cavallo bright and
early tomorrow, eh?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross realized that he was being jollied out of an attack
of the sulks. He didn’t like it.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">The hotel was small and comfortable, with a bar crowded
by roistering pilots and their dates. The glimpses Ross got
of social life on Azor added up to a damnably unfair picture.
It was the man who paid. Breuer roguishly tested the
mattress in their room, nudging Helena, and then announced,
“Get settled, kids, while I visit the bar.”</p>

<p class="c007">When the door rolled shut behind her Ross said furiously:
“Look, you! Protective mimicry’s fine up to a point,
but let’s not forget what this mission is all about. We seem
to be suckered into spending the night, but by hell tomorrow
morning bright and early we find those Cavallo people—”</p>

<p class="c007">“There,” Helena said soothingly. “Don’t be angry, Ross.
I promise I won’t be out late, and she really did insist.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I suppose so,” he grumbled. “Just remember it’s no
pleasure trip.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Not for you, perhaps,” she smiled sweetly.</p>

<p class="c007">He let it drop there, afraid to push the matter.</p>

<p class="c007">Breuer returned in about ten minutes with a slight glow
on. “It’s all fixed,” she told Helena. “Got a swell crowd
lined up. Table at Virgin Willie’s—oops!” She glanced at
Ross. “No harm in it, of course,” she said. “Anything you
want, Ross, just dial service. It’s on my account. I fixed it
with the desk.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Thanks.”</p>

<p class="c007">They left, and Ross went grumpily to bed.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">A secretive rustle in the room awoke him. “Helena?” he
asked drowsily.</p>

<p class="c007">Pilot Breuer’s voice giggled drunkenly, “Nope. Helena’s
passed out at Virgin Willie’s, kind of the way I figured she
would be on triple antigravs. Had my eye on you since Azor
City, baby. You gonna be nice to me?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Get out of here!” Ross hissed furiously. “Out of here or
I’ll yell like hell.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_78">78</span>“So yell,” she giggled. “I got the house dick fixed. They
know me here, baby——”</p>

<p class="c007">He fumbled for the bedside light and snapped it on. “I’ll
pitch you right through the door,” he announced. “And if
you give me any more lip I won’t bother to open it before
I do.”</p>

<p class="c007">She hiccupped and said, “A spirited lad. That’s the way
I like ’em.” With one hand she drew a nasty-looking little
pistol. With the other she pulled a long zipper and stepped
out of her pilot’s coveralls.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gulped. There were three ways to play this, the
smart way, the stupid way, and the way that all of a sudden
began to look attractive. He tried the stupid way.</p>

<p class="c007">He got the pistol barrel alongside his ear for his pains.
“Don’t jump me,” Pilot Breuer giggled. “The boys that’ve
tried to take this gun away from me are stretched end to
end from here to Azor City. By me, baby.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross blinked through a red-spotted haze. He took a deep
breath and got smart. “You’re pretty tough,” he said admiringly.</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, sure.” She kicked the coveralls across the room and
moved in on him. “Baby,” she said caressingly, “if I seem
to sort of forget myself in the next couple of minutes, don’t
get any ideas. I <i>never</i> let go of my gun. Move over.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure,” Ross said hollowly. This, he told himself disgustedly,
was the damnedest, silliest, ridiculousest....</p>

<p class="c007">There was a furious hiccup from the door. “So!” Helena
said venomously, pushing the door wide and almost falling
to the floor. “So!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross flailed out of the bed, kicking the pistol out of
Pilot Breuer’s hand in the process. He cried enthusiastically,
“Helena, dear!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Don’t you ‘Helena-dear’ me!” she said, moving in and
kicking the door shut behind her. “I leave you alone for
one little minute, and what happens? And <i>you</i>!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sorry,” Pilot Breuer muttered, climbing into her coveralls.
“Wrong room. Must’ve had one anti-grav too many.”
She licked her lips apprehensively, zipping her coveralls
and sidling toward the door. With one hand on the knob,
she said diffidently, “If I could have my gun back——?
<span class="pageno" id="Page_79">79</span>No, you’re right! I’ll get it tomorrow.” She got through the
door just ahead of a lamp.</p>

<p class="c007">“Hussy!” spat Helena. “And you, Ross——”</p>

<p class="c007">It was the last straw. As Ross lurched toward her he
regretted only one thing: that he didn’t have a hairbrush.</p>

<p class="c007">Pilot Breuer had been right. Nobody paid any attention
to the noise.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">“Yes, Ross.” Helena had hardly touched her breakfast;
she sat with her eyes downcast.</p>

<p class="c007">“‘Yes, Ross’,” he mimicked bitterly. “It better be ‘Yes,
Ross.’ This place may look all right to you, but it’s trouble.
You don’t want to find yourself stuck here all your life, do
you? Then do what I tell you.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">He pushed the remains of his food away. “Oh, the hell
with it,” he said dispiritedly. “I wish I’d never started out
on this fool’s errand. And I double damn well wish I’d left
you in the dye vats.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, Ro——I mean, I’m glad you didn’t, Ross,” she
said in a small voice.</p>

<p class="c007">He stood up and patted her shoulder absently. “Come
on,” he said, “we’ve got to get over to the Cavallo place.
I wish you had let me talk to them on the phone.”</p>

<p class="c007">She said reasonably, “But you said——”</p>

<p class="c007">“I know what I said. When we get there, remember that
I do the talking.”</p>

<p class="c007">They walked through green-lit streets, filled with proud-looking
women and sad-eyed men. The Cavallo Machine-Tool
Corporation was only a few intersections away, by the
map the desk clerk had drawn for Helena; they found it
without trouble. It was a smallish sort of building for a
factory, Ross thought, but perhaps that was how factories
went on Azor. Besides, it was well constructed and beautifully
landscaped with the purplish lawns these people
seemed to prefer.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena led him through the door, as was right and
proper. She said to the busy little bald-headed man who
seemed to be the receptionist, “We’re expected. Miss Cavallo,
please.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_80">80</span>“Certainly, Ma’am,” he said with a gap-toothed smile,
and worked a combination of rods and buttons on the desk
beside him. In a moment, he said, “Go right in. Three up
and four over; can’t miss it.”</p>

<p class="c007">They passed through a noisy territory of machines where
metal was sliced, spun, hacked, and planed; no one seemed
to be paying any attention to them. Ross wondered who had
built the machines, and had a sudden flash of realization as
to where those builders were now: On “Minerva,” staring
at the unattainable free sky.</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo was a motherly type with a large black
cigar. “Sit right down,” she said heartily. “You, too, young
man. Tell me what we in Cavallo Company can do for you.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena opened her mouth, but Ross stopped her with
a gesture. “That’s enough,” he said quietly. “I’ll take over.
Miss Cavallo,” he declaimed from memory, “what follows
is under the seal.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Is it indeed! What do you know,” she said.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said, “Wesley.”</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo slapped her thigh admiringly. “Son of a
gun,” she said admiringly. “How this takes me back—those
long-ago childhood days, learning these things at my mother’s
knee. Let’s see. Uh—the limiting velocity is C.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But C<sup>2</sup> is not a velocity,” Ross finished triumphantly.
And, from the heart, “Miss Cavallo, you don’t begin to
know how happy this makes me.”</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo reached over and pumped his hand, then
Helena’s. To the girl she said, “You’ve got a right to be a
proud woman, believe me. The way he got through it,
without a single stumble! Never saw anything like it in my
life. Well, just tell me what I can do for you, now that that’s
over.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross took a deep, deep breath. He said earnestly, “A
great deal. I don’t know where to begin. You see, it all goes
back to Halsey’s Planet, where I come from. This, uh, this
ship came in, a longliner, and it got some of us a little
worried because, well, it seemed that some of the planets
were no longer in communication. We—uh, Miss Cavallo?”
She was smiling pleasantly enough, but Ross had the
crazy feeling that he just wasn’t getting through to her.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_81">81</span>“Go right ahead,” she boomed. “God knows, I’ve got
nothing against men in business; that’s old-fashioned prejudice.
Take your time. I won’t bite you. Get on with your
proposition, young man.”</p>

<p class="c007">“It isn’t exactly a proposition,” Ross said weakly. All of
a sudden the words seemed hard to find. What did you say
to a potential partner in the salvation of the human race
when she just nodded and blew cigar smoke at you?</p>

<p class="c007">He made an effort. “Halsey’s Planet was the seventh alternate
destination for this ship, and so we figured——That
is, Miss Cavallo, it kind of looked like there was some
sort of trouble. So Mr. Haarland—he’s the one who has the
F-T-L secret on Halsey, like you do here on Azor—he
passed it on to me, of course—well, he asked me to, well,
sort of take a look around.” He stopped. The words by then
were just barely audible anyhow; and Miss Cavallo had
been looking furtively at her watch.</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo shrugged sympathetically to Helena.
“They’re all like that under the skin, aren’t they?” she
observed ambiguously. “Well, if men could take our jobs
away from us, what would we do? Stay home and mind the
kids?” She roared and poked a box of cigars at Helena.</p>

<p class="c007">“Now,” she said briskly, “let’s get down to cases. I
really enjoyed hearing those lines from you, young man,
and I want you to know that I’m prepared to help you in
any possible way because of them. Open a line of credit,
speed up deliveries, send along some of our technical
people to help you get set up—anything. Now, what can
I do for you? Turret lathes? Grinders? Screw machines?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Miss Cavallo,” Ross said desperately, “don’t you know
anything about the faster-than-light secret?”</p>

<p class="c007">She said impatiently, “Of course I do, young man. Said
the responses, didn’t I? There’s no call for that item,
though.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I don’t want to <i>buy</i> one,” Ross cried. “I have one. Don’t
you realize that the human race is in danger? Populations
are dying out or going out of communication all over the
galaxy. Don’t you want to do something about it before we
all go under?”</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo dropped all traces of a smile. Her face was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_82">82</span>like flint as she stood up and pointed to the window.
“Young man,” she said icily, “take a look out there. That’s
the Cavallo Machine-Tool Company. Does that look as if
we’re going under?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I know, but Clyde, Cyrnus One, Ragansworld—at least
a dozen planets I can name—are <i>gone</i>. Didn’t you ever
think that you might be next?”</p>

<p class="c007">Miss Cavallo kept her voice level, but only with a visible
effort.</p>

<p class="c007">She said flatly, “No. Never. Young man, I have plenty to
do right here on Azor without bothering my head about
those places you’re talking about. Seventy-five years ago
there was another fellow just like you; Flarney, some name
like that; my grandmother told me about him. He came
bustling in here causing trouble, with that old silly jingle
about Wesley and C-square and so on, with some cock-and-bull
story about a planet that was starving to death, stirring
up a lot of commotion. Well, he wound up on ‘Minerva,’
because he wouldn’t take no for an answer. Watch
out that you don’t do the same.”</p>

<p class="c007">She marched majestically to the door. “And now,” she
said, “if you’ve wasted quite enough of my time, kindly
leave.”</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_83">83</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 8"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 8</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">“STUPID old bat,” Ross muttered. They
were walking aimlessly down Fifteen Street, the nicely-landscaped
machine tool works behind them.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said timidly: “You really shouldn’t talk that way,
Ross. She <i>is</i> older than you, after all. Old heads are——”</p>

<p class="c007">“——wisest,” he wearily agreed. “Also the most conservative.
Also the most rigidly inflexible; also the most
firmly closed to the reception of new ideas. With one exception.”</p>

<p class="c007">She reeled under the triple blasphemy and then faintly
asked: “What’s the exception?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross became aware that they were not alone. Their very
manner of walking, he a little ahead, obviously leading the
way, was drawing unfavorable attention from passers-by.
Nothing organized or even definite—just looks ranging
from puzzled distaste to anger. He said, “Somebody named
Haarland. Never mind,” and in a lower voice: “Straighten
up. Step out a little ahead of me. Scowl.”</p>

<p class="c007">She managed it all except the scowl. The expression on
her face got some stupefied looks from other pedestrians,
but nothing worse.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said loudly and plaintively: “I don’t like it here
after all, Ross. Can’t we get away from all these women?”</p>

<p class="c007">Should the impulse seize you, placard ancient Brooklyn
<span class="pageno" id="Page_84">84</span>with twenty-four sheets proclaiming the Dodgers to be
cellar-dwelling bums. Mount a detergent box and inform a
crowd of Altairians that they are degenerate slith-fondlers
if you must. Announce in a crowded Cephean bar room
that Sadkia Revall is no better than she should be. From
these situations you have some chance of emerging intact.
But never, never pronounce the word “women” as Helena
pronounced it on Fifteen Street, Novj Grad, Azor.</p>

<p class="c007">The mob took only seconds to form.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross and Helena found themselves with their backs to
the glass doors of a food store. The handful of women who
had actually heard the remark were all talking to them
simultaneously, with fist-shaking. Behind them stood as
many as a dozen women who knew only that something had
happened and that there were comfortably outnumbered
victims available. The noise was deafening, and Helena
began to cry. Ross first wondered if he could bring himself
to knock down a woman; then realized after studying the
hulking virago in their foreground that he might bring
himself to try but probably would not succeed.</p>

<p class="c007">She seemed to be accusing Helena of masquerading, of
advocating equality, of uttering obscenely antisocial statements
in the public road, to the affront of all decent-minded
girls.</p>

<p class="c007">There was violence in the air. Ross was on the point of
blocking a roundhouse right when the glass doors opened
behind them. The small diversion distracted the imbecile
collective brain of the mob.</p>

<p class="c007">“What’s going on here?” a suety voice demanded. “Ladies,
may I please get through?”</p>

<p class="c007">It was a man trying to emerge from the food shop with
a double armful of cartons. He was a great fat slob, quite
hairless, and smelling powerfully of kitchen. He wore the
gravy-spotted whites of any cook anywhere.</p>

<p class="c007">The virago said to him, “Keep out of this, Willie. This
fellow here’s a masquerader. The thing I heard him
say——!”</p>

<p class="c007">“I’m not,” Helena wept. “I’m not!”</p>

<p class="c007">The cook stooped to look into her face and turned on
the mob. “She isn’t,” he said definitely. “She’s a lady from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_85">85</span>another system. She was slopping up triple antigravs at my
place last night with a gang of jet pilots.”</p>

<p class="c007">“That doesn’t prove a thing!” the virago yelled.</p>

<p class="c007">“Madam,” the cook said wearily, “after her third antigrav
I had to trip her up and crown her. She was about to
climb the bar and corner my barman.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked at her fixedly. She stopped crying and nervously
cleared her throat.</p>

<p class="c007">“So if you’ll just let us through,” the cook bustled, seizing
the psychological moment of doubt. His enormous belly
bulldozed a lane for them. “Beg pardon. Excuse us.
Madam, will you—thank you. Beg pardon——”</p>

<p class="c007">The lynchers were beginning to drift away, embarrassed.
The party had collapsed. “Faster,” the cook hissed at them.
“Beg pardon——” And they were in the clear and well
down the street.</p>

<p class="c007">“Thank you, Sir,” Helena said humbly.</p>

<p class="c007">“Just ‘Willie’, <i>if</i> you please,” the fat man said.</p>

<p class="c007">One hand descended on Ross’s shoulder and another on
Helena’s. They both belonged to the virago. She spun them
around, glaring. “<i>I’m</i> not satisfied with the brush-off,” she
snapped. “Exactly what did you mean by that remark you
made?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena wailed, “It’s just that you and all these other
women here seem so <i>young</i>.”</p>

<p class="c007">The virago’s granite face softened. She let go and tucked
in a strand of steel-wool hair. “Did you really think so,
dear?” she asked, beaming. “There, I’m sorry I got excited.
A wee bit jealous, were you? Well, we’re broad-minded
here in Novj Grad.” She patted Helena’s arm and walked
off, smiling and jaunty.</p>

<p class="c007">Virgin Willie led off and they followed him. Ross’s knees
were shaky. The virago had not known that to Helena
“young” meant “stupid.”</p>

<p class="c007">The cook absently acknowledged smiles and nods as they
walked. He was, obviously, a character. Between salutes
he delivered a low-voiced, rapid-fire reaming to Ross and
Helena. “Silly stunt. Didn’t you hear about the riots? Supposed
to be arms caches somewhere here on the south side.
Everybody’s nerves absolutely ragged. Somebody gets
<span class="pageno" id="Page_86">86</span>smashed up in traffic, they blame it on us. Don’t care <i>where</i>
you’re from. Watch it next time.”</p>

<p class="c007">“We will, Willie,” Helena said contritely. “And I think
you run an awfully nice restaurant.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” said Ross, looking at her.</p>

<p class="c007">Willie muttered, “I guess you’re clear. You still staying
at that hot pilot’s hangout? This is where we say good-by,
then. You turn left.”</p>

<p class="c007">He waddled on down the street. Helena said instantly,
“I don’t remember a thing, Ross.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Okay,” he said. “You don’t remember a thing.”</p>

<p class="c007">She looked relieved and said brightly, “So let’s get back
to the hotel.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Okay,” he said. Climbed the bar and tried to corner
the.... Halfway to the hotel he slowed, then stopped, and
said, “I just thought of something. Maybe we’re not staying
there any more. After last night why should Breuer carry
us on her tab? I thought we’d have some money to carry us
from the Cavallos by now——”</p>

<p class="c007">“The ship?” she asked in a small voice.</p>

<p class="c007">“Across the continent. Hell! Maybe Breuer forgave and
forgot. Let’s try, anyway.”</p>

<p class="c007">They never got as far as the hotel. When they reached
the square it stood on, there was a breathless rush and Bernie
stood before them, panting and holding a hand over his
chest. “In here,” he gasped, and nodded at a shopfront that
announced hot brew. Ross thoughtlessly started first
through the door and caught Bernie’s look of alarm. He
opened the door for Helena, who went through smiling
nervously.</p>

<p class="c007">They settled at a small table in an empty corner in stiff
silence. “I’ve been walking around that square all morning,”
Bernie said, with a cowed look at Helena.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross told her: “This young man and I had a talk yesterday
at the plane while you were eating. What is it, Bernie?”</p>

<p class="c007">He still couldn’t believe that he was doing it, but Bernie
said in a scared whisper: “Wanted to head you off and warn
you. Breuer was down at the field cafe this morning, talking
loud to the other hot-shots. She said you—both of you—talked
equality. Said she got up with a hangover and you
<span class="pageno" id="Page_87">87</span>were gone. But she said there’d be six policewomen waiting
in your room when you got back.” He leaned forward
on the table. Ross remembered that he had been forced to
sell his ration card.</p>

<p class="c007">“Here comes the waiter,” he said softly. “Order something
for all of us. We have a little money. And thanks,
Bernie.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena asked, “What do we <i>do</i>?”</p>

<p class="c007">“We eat,” Ross said practically. “Then we think. Shut
up; let Bernie order.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">They ate; and then they thought. Nothing much seemed
to come from all the thinking, though.</p>

<p class="c007">They were a long, long way from the spaceship. Ross
commandeered all of Helena’s leftover cash. It was almost,
not quite, enough for one person to get halfway back to
Azor City. He and Bernie turned out their pockets and
added everything they had, including pawnable valuables.
That helped. It made the total almost enough for one
person to get three-quarters of the way back.</p>

<p class="c007">It didn’t help enough.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said, “Bernie, what would happen if we, well, stole
something?”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie shrugged. “It’s against the law, of course. They
probably wouldn’t prosecute, though.”</p>

<p class="c007">“They wouldn’t?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Not if they can prove egalitarianism on you. Stealing’s
against the law; preaching equality is against the <i>state</i>. You
get the maximum penalty for that.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena choked on her drink, but Ross merely nodded.
“So we might as well take a chance,” he said. “Thanks,
Bernie. We won’t bother you any more. You’ll forget you
heard this, won’t you?”</p>

<p class="c007">“The hell I will!” Bernie squawked. “If you’re getting out
of here, I want to go with you! You aren’t leaving <i>me</i>
behind!”</p>

<p class="c007">“But Bernie——” Ross started. He was interrupted by
the manager, a battleship-class female with a mighty prow,
who came scowling toward them.</p>

<p class="c007">“Pipe down,” she ordered coarsely. “This place is for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_88">88</span>decent people; we don’t want no disturbances here. If you
can’t act decent, get out.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Awk,” said Helena as Ross kicked her under the table.
“I mean, yes ma’am. Sorry if we were talking too loud.”
They watched the manager walk away in silence.</p>

<p class="c007">As soon as she was fairly away, Ross hissed, “It’s out of
the question, Bernie. You might be jumping from the frying-pan
into the fire.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie asked, startled, “The what?”</p>

<p class="c007">“The—never mind, it’s just an expression where I come
from. It means you might get out of this place and find
yourself somewhere worse. We don’t know where we’re
going next; you might wish to God you were back here
within the next three days.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I’ll take that chance,” Bernie said earnestly. “Look,
Ross, I played square with you. I didn’t have to stick my
neck out and warn you. How about giving me a break too?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena interrupted, “He’s right, Ross. After all, we owe
him that much, don’t we? I mean, if a person does that
much for a person, a person ought to——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, shut up.” Ross glared at both of them. “You two
seem to think this is a game,” he said bitterly. “Let me
set you straight, both of you. It isn’t. More hangs on what
happens to me than either of you realize. The fate of the
human race, for instance.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena flashed a look at Bernie. “Of <i>course</i>, Ross,” she
said soothingly. “Both of us know that, don’t we, Bernie?”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie stammered, “Sure—sure we do, Ross.” He
rubbed his ankle. He went on, “Honest, Ross, I want to
get the hell away from Azor once and for all. I don’t care
<i>where</i> you’re going. Anything would be better than this
place and the damned female bloodsuckers that——”</p>

<p class="c007">He stopped, petrified. His eyes, looking over Ross’s
shoulder, were enormous.</p>

<p class="c007">“Go on, sonny,” said a rich female voice from behind
Ross. “Don’t let me and the lieutenant stop you just when
you’re going good.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">“It must have been that damn manager,” Bernie said
for the fifteenth time.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_89">89</span>Ross uncrossed his legs painfully and tried lying on the
floor on his side. “What’s the difference?” he asked. “They
got us; we’re in the jug. And face it: somebody would
have caught us sooner or later, and we might have wound
up in a worse jail than this one.” He shifted uncomfortably.
“If that’s possible, I mean. Why don’t they at least
have beds in these places?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh,” said Bernie immediately, “some do. The jails in
Azor City and Nuevo Reykjavik have beds; Novj Grad,
Eleanor, and Milo don’t. I mean, that’s what they tell me,”
he added virtuously.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure,” Ross growled. “Well, what do they tell you
usually happens next?”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie spread his hands. “Different things. First there’s
a hearing. That’s all over by now. Then an indictment and
trial. Maybe that’s started already; sometimes they get it
in on the same day as the hearing, sometimes not. Then—tomorrow
sometime, most likely—comes the sentencing.
We’ll know about that, though, because we’ll be there.
The law’s very strict on that—they always have you in
the court for sentencing.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross cried, “You mean the trial might be going on
right now without us?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Of course. What else? Think they’d take a chance on
having the prisoners creating a disturbance during the
trial?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross groaned and turned his face to the wall. For this,
he thought, he had come the better part of a hundred light
years; for this he had left a comfortable job with a brilliant
future. He spent a measurable period of time cursing
the memory of old Haarland and his double-jointed, persuasive
tongue.</p>

<p class="c007">Back in the days of Ross’s early teens he had seen a
good many situations like this in the tri-dis, and the hero
had never failed to extricate himself by a simple exercise
of superhuman strength, intellect, and ingenuity. That,
Ross told himself, was just what he needed now. The
trouble was, he didn’t have them.</p>

<p class="c007">All he had was the secret of faster-than-light travel.
And, here on Azor as on the planet of the graybeards, it
<span class="pageno" id="Page_90">90</span>had laid a king-sized egg. Women, Ross thought bitterly,
women were basically inward-directed and self-seeking;
trust them with the secret of F-T-L; make them, like the
Cavallos, custodians of a universe-racking truth; and see
the secret lost or embalmed in sterile custom. What, he
silently demanded of himself, did the greatest of scientific
discoveries mean to a biological baby-foundry? How could
any female—no single member of which class had ever
painted a great picture, written a great book, composed a
great sonata, or discovered a great scientific truth—appreciate
the ultimate importance of the F-T-L drive? It
was like entrusting a first-folio Shakespeare to a broody
hen; the shredded scraps would be made into a nest. For
the egg came first. Motherhood was all.</p>

<p class="c007">That explained it, of course. That, Ross told himself
moodily, explained everything except why the F-T-L secret
had fallen into apparently equal or worse desuetude
on such planets as Gemsel, Clyde, Cyrnus One, Ragansworld,
Tau Ceti II, Capella’s family of eight, and perhaps
a hundred others.</p>

<p class="c007">Ragansworld was gone entirely, drowned in a planetary
nebula.</p>

<p class="c007">The planet of the graybeard had gone to seed; nothing
new, nothing not hallowed by tradition had a chance in
its decrepit social order.</p>

<p class="c007">His home, Halsey’s Planet, was rapidly, calmly, inevitably
depopulating itself.</p>

<p class="c007">And Azor had fallen into a rigid, self-centered matriarchal
order that only an act of God could break.</p>

<p class="c007">Was there a pattern? Were there any similarities?</p>

<p class="c007">Ross searched desperately in his mind; but without result.
The image of Helena kept intruding itself between
him and his thoughts. Was he getting sentimental about
that sweet little chucklehead? Who, he hastily added, had
come near to criminally assaulting him, who had climbed
the....</p>

<p class="c007">He turned to the little waiter and demanded: “Will she—Helena—be
on the orbital station with us if we’re all
convicted?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_91">91</span>“Hmm—no, I should think not. As a responsible person,
she gets the supreme penalty.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross numbly asked after a long pause, “How? Nothing—painful?”
It was hard to think of Helena dangling grotesquely
at a rope’s end or jolting as she sat strapped in
a large, ugly chair. But there were things he had heard of
which were horribly worse.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie had been watching him. “I’m sorry,” the little
man said soberly. “It’s up to the judge. She’s a foreigner,
so they may consider that an extenuating circumstance
and place some quick-acting poison aboard for her to
take. Otherwise it’s slow starvation.”</p>

<p class="c007">A faint, irrational hope had begun to dawn in Ross’s
mind. “Aboard what? Exactly how does it work?”</p>

<p class="c007">“They’ll put her aboard some hulk with the rockets disabled,
fire it off into space—and that’s that. I suppose
they’ll use the ship she came in——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross was frantically searching his pockets. He had a
stylus. “Got any paper?” he briskly demanded of Bernie.</p>

<p class="c007">“Yes, but——?” The waiter blankly passed over an order
book. Ross sprawled on the floor and began to scribble:
“Never mind how or why this works. Do it. You saw
me work the big fan-shaped computer in the center room
and you can do it too. Find the master star maps in the
chart room. Look up the co-ordinates of Halsey’s System.
Set these co-ordinates on the twenty-seven dials marked
Proximate Mass. Take the readings on the windows above
the dials and set them on the cursors of the computer——”
He scribbled furiously, from time to time forcing himself
deliberately to slow down as the writing became an unreadable
scrawl. He filled the ruled fronts of the order
pages and then the backs—perhaps ten thousand closely-written
words, and not one of them wasted. Haarland’s
precise instructions, mercilessly drilled into him, flowed
out again.</p>

<p class="c007">He flung the stylus down at last and read through the
book again, ignoring the gaping Bernie. It was all there,
as far as he could tell. Grant her a lot of luck and more
brains than he privately credited her with, and she had a
fighting chance of winding up within radar range of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_92">92</span>Halsey’s Planet. GCA could take her down from there; an
annoying ship-like object hanging on the radarscopes
would provoke a reconnaissance.</p>

<p class="c007">She knew absolutely nothing about F-T-L or the Wesley
drive, but then—neither did he. That fact itself was
no handicap.</p>

<p class="c007">He might rot on “Minerva,” but some word might get
back to Haarland. And so would the ship. And Helena
would not perish miserably in a drifting hulk.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie saw the mysterious job was ended and dared
to ask, “A letter?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No,” Ross said jubilantly. “By God, if things break
right they won’t get her. It’s like this——”</p>

<p class="c007">He happily began to explain that his F-T-L ship’s rockets
were only auxiliaries for fine maneuvering, but he
counted on the court not knowing that. If he and Helena
could persuade....</p>

<p class="c007">As he went on the look on Bernie’s face changed very
slowly from hope to pity to politely-simulated interest.
Correspondingly Ross’s accounting became labored and
faulty. The pauses became longer and at last he broke off,
filled with self-contempt at his folly. He said bitterly,
“You don’t think it’ll work.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, no!” Bernie protested with too much heartiness.
“I could see she’s awfully mechanically-minded for a
woman, even if it wouldn’t be polite to say so. Sure it’ll
work, Ross. Sure!”</p>

<p class="c007">The hell it would.</p>

<p class="c007">At least he had disposed of a few hours. And—perhaps
some bungling setting would explode the ship, or end a
Wesley Jump in the heart of a white dwarf star—sudden
annihilation, whiffing Helena out of existence before her
body could realize that it had died, before the beginning
of apprehension could darken happy absorption with a
task she thought would bring her to safety.</p>

<p class="c007">For that reason alone he had to carry the scheme
through.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">The courtroom was a chintzy place bright with spring
flowers. Ross and Helena looked numbly at one another
<span class="pageno" id="Page_93">93</span>from opposite corners while the previous order of business
was cleared from the docket. A wedding.</p>

<p class="c007">The judge, unexpectedly sweet-faced and slender though
gray, obviously took such parts of her work seriously.
“Marylyn and Kent,” she was saying earnestly to the happy
couple, “I suppose you know my reputation. I lecture
people a bit before I tie the knot. Evidently it’s not such
a bad idea because my marriages turn out well. Last week
in Eleanor one of my girls was arrested and reprimanded
for gross infidelity and a couple of years ago right here in
Novj Grad one of my boys got five hundred lashes for
nonsupport. Let’s hope it did them some good, but the
cases were unusual. My people, I like to think, know their
rights and responsibilities when they walk out of my
court, and I think the record bears me out.</p>

<p class="c007">“Marylyn, you have chosen to share part of your life
with this man. You intend to bear his children. This
should not be because your animal appetites have overcome
you and you can’t win his consent in any other way
but because you know, down deep in your womanly heart,
that you can make him happy. Never forget this. If you
should thoughtlessly conceive by some other man, don’t
tell him. He would only brood. Be thrifty, Marylyn. I have
seen more marriages broken up by finances than any other
reason. If your husband earns a hundred Eleanors a week,
spend only that and no more. If he makes <i>fifty</i> Eleanors
a week spend only that and no more. Honorable poverty
is preferable to debt. And, from a practical standpoint, if
you spend more than your husband earns he will be jailed
for debt sooner or later, with resulting loss to your own
pocket.</p>

<p class="c007">“Kent, you have accepted the proposal of this woman.
I see by your dossier that you got in just under the wire.
In your income group the antibachelor laws would have
caught up with you in one more week. I must say I don’t
like the look of it, but I’ll give you the benefit of the
doubt. I want to talk to you about the meaning of marriage.
Not just the wage assignment, not just the insurance
policy, not just the waiver of paternity and copulation
‘rights’, so-called. Those, as a good citizen, you will abide
<span class="pageno" id="Page_94">94</span>by automatically—Heaven help you if you don’t. But there
is more to marriage than that. The honor you have been
done by this woman who sees you as desirable and who
wishes to make you happy over the years is not a sterile
legalism. Marriage is like a rocket, I sometimes think. The
brute, unreasoning strength of the main jets representing
the husband’s share and the delicate precise steering and
stabilizing jets the wife’s. We have all of us seen too many
marriages crash to the ground like a rocket when these
roles were reversed. It is not reasonable to expect the wife
to provide the drive—that is, the income. It is not reasonable
to expect the husband to provide the steering—that
is, the direction of the personal and household expenditures.
So much for the material side of things. On the spiritual
side, I have little to say. The laws are most explicit;
see that you obey them—and if you don’t, you had better
pray that you wind up in some court other than mine. I
have no patience with the obsolete doctrine that there is
such a legal entity as seduction by female, despite the
mouthings of certain so-called jurists who disgrace the
bench of a certain nearby city.</p>

<p class="c007">“Having heard these things, Marylyn and Kent, step
forward and join hands.”</p>

<p class="c007">They did. The ceremony was short and simple; the
couple then walked from the courtroom under the beaming
smile of the judge.</p>

<p class="c007">A burly guard next to Ross pointed at the groom.
“Look,” she said sentimentally. “He’s crying. Cute!”</p>

<p class="c007">“I don’t blame the poor sucker,” Ross flared, and then,
being a man of conscience, wondered suddenly if that was
why, on Halsey’s Planet, women cried at weddings.</p>

<p class="c007">A clerk called: “Dear, let’s have those egalitarians front
and center, please. Her honor’s terribly rushed.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was escorted forward from one side, while Ross
and Bernie were jostled to the fore from the other. The
judge turned from the happy couple. As she looked down
at the three of them the smile that curved her lips turned
into something quite different. Ross, quailing, suddenly
realized that he had seen just that expression once before.
It was when he was very, very young, when a friend of his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_95">95</span>mother’s had come bustling into the kitchen where he was
playing, just after she had smelled, and just before she
had seen, the long-dead rat he had fetched up from the
abandoned cellar across the street.</p>

<p class="c007">While the clerk was reading the orders and indictment,
the judge’s stare never wavered. And when the clerk had
finished, the judge’s silent stare remained, for a long, terrible
time.</p>

<p class="c007">In the quietest of voices, the judge said, “So.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross caught a flicker of motion out of the corner of his
eye. He turned just in time to see Bernie, knees buckling,
slip white-faced and unconscious to the floor. The guards
rushed forward, but the judge raised a peremptory hand.
“Leave him alone,” she ordered soberly. “It is kinder. Defendants,
you are charged with the gravest of crimes. Have
you anything to say before sentence is passed on you?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross tried to force words—any words, to protest, to
plead, to vilify—through his clogged throat. All he managed
was a croaking sound; and Helena, by his side,
nudged him sharply to silence. He turned to her sharply,
and realized that this was the best chance he’d be likely
to get. He clutched at her, rolled up his eyes, slumped to
the floor in as close an imitation of Bernie’s swoon as he
could manage.</p>

<p class="c007">The judge was visibly annoyed, and this time she didn’t
stop the attendants when they rushed in to kick him erect.
But he had the consolation of seeing a flash of understanding
cross Helena’s face, and her hand dart to a pocket
with the paper he had handed her. In the confusion no
one saw.</p>

<p class="c007">The rest of the courtroom scene was kaleidoscopic in
Ross’s recollection. The only part he remembered clearly
was the judge’s voice as she said to him and Bernie,
“——for the rest of your lives, as long as Almighty God
shall, in Her infinite wisdom, permit you the breath of
life, be banished from Azor and all of its allied worlds to
the prison hulk in ‘Orbit Minerva.’”</p>

<p class="c007">And they were hustled out as the judge, even more
wrathful than before, turned to pronounce sentence on
Helena.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 9"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 9</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THE guard spat disgustedly. “Fine lot of
wrecks we’re getting,” she complained. “Not like the old
days. They used to send real men here.” She glowered at
Ross and Bernie, holding their commitment papers loosely
in her hand. “And for treason, too!” she added. “Used to
be it took guts to commit a crime against the state.” She
shook her head, then made a noise of distaste and scribbled
initials on the commitment papers. She handed them
back to the pilot who had brought them up from Azor,
who grinned, waved, and got out of there. “All right,” said
the guard, “we have to take what we get. I’ll have to put
you two on construction; you’ll never stand up under hard
work. Keep your noses clean, that’s all. Up at 0500; breakfast
till 0510; work detail till 1950; dinner and recreation
till 2005; then lights out. Miss a formation and you miss a
meal. Miss two, and you get punishment detail. Nobody
misses three.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross and Bernie found themselves sharing a communal
cell. They had all of five minutes to look around and get
oriented; then they were out on their first work detail.</p>

<p class="c007">It wasn’t so bad as it sounded. Their shiftmates were a
couple of dozen ragged-looking wrecks, half-heartedly assembling
a sort of meccano-toy wall out of sheets of perforated
steel and clip-spring bolts. All the parts seemed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span>well worn; some of the bolts hardly closed. It took Ross
the better part of his first detail, whispering when the
guards were looking the other way, to find out why. Their
half of the prisoners were Construction; the other half was
Demolition. What Construction in the morning put up,
Demolition in the evening tore down. Neither side was
anxious to set any speed records, and the guards without
exception were too bored to care.</p>

<p class="c007">With any kind of luck, Ross found, he could hope eventually
to get a real job—manning the “Minerva’s” radar,
signal, or generating facilities, working in the kitchens or
service shops, perhaps even as an orderly in the guard
quarters. (Although Ross quite by accident chanced to see
a guard’s orderly as he passed through a corridor near the
work area, a handkerchief held daintily to his nose. And
though the orderly’s clothing was neat and his plump
cheeks indicated good eating, the haunted expression in
his eyes made Ross think twice.)</p>

<p class="c007">The one thing he could not do, according to the testimony
of every man he spoke to, was escape.</p>

<p class="c007">The fifth time Ross got that answer, the guard had
stepped out of the room. Ross took the opportunity to
thrash the thing through. “Why?” he demanded. “Back
where I come from we’ve got lots of prisons. I never heard
of one nobody escaped from.”</p>

<p class="c007">The other prisoner laughed shortly. “Now you have,” he
said. “Go ahead, try. Every one of us has tried, one time
or another. There’s only one thing stopping you—there’s
no place to go. You can get past the guards easy enough—they’re
lazy, when they’re not either drunk or boy-chasing.
You can roam around ‘Minerva’ all you like. You can
even get to the spacelock, and if you want to you can walk
right through it. But not in a spacesuit, because there
aren’t any on board. And not into the tender that brings
us up from Azor, because you aren’t built right.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked puzzled. “Not built right?”</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s right. There’s telescreens and remote-control
locks built into that tender. The pilot brings you up, but
once she couples with ‘Minerva’ the controls lock. And
the only way they get unlocked is when three women, in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>three different substations down on Azor, push the RC
releases. And they don’t do that until they look in their
screens, and see that everybody who has turned up in the
tender has stripped down to nothing at all, and every one
of them is by-God female. Any further questions?” He
grinned wryly. “Don’t even think about plastic surgery, if
that happens to cross your mind,” he said. “We have two
men here who tried it. You don’t have much equipment
here; you can’t do a neat enough job.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gulped. “Hadn’t given it a thought,” he assured
the other man. “You can’t even hide away in a trunk or
something?”</p>

<p class="c007">The prisoner shook his head. “Aren’t any trunks. Everything’s
one way—Azor to ‘Minerva’—except pilots and
guards. No men ever go back. When you die, you go out
the lock—without a ship. Same with everything else that
they want to get rid of.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross thought hard. “What if they—well, what if you’re
sent up here and all, and then some new evidence turns
up and you’re found innocent? Don’t they send you back
then?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Found innocent?” The man looked at Ross pityingly.
“Man, you <i>are</i> new. Hey,” he called. “Hey, Chuck! This
guy wants to know what happens if they find out back on
Azor that he’s innocent!”</p>

<p class="c007">Chuck exploded into laughter. Wiping his eyes, he
walked over to Ross. “Thanks,” he grinned. “Haven’t had
a good laugh in fifteen years.”</p>

<p class="c007">“I don’t see that that’s so funny,” Ross said defensively.
“After all, the judge can make a mistake, none of us is
per—awk!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up!” Chuck hissed, holding a hand over Ross’s
mouth. “Do you want to get us all in <i>real</i> trouble? Some
of these guys would rat to the guards for an extra hunk of
bread! The judges never make a mistake.” And his lips
formed the silent word: “Officially.”</p>

<p class="c007">He let go of Ross and stood back, but didn’t walk away.
He scratched his head. “Say,” he said, “you ask some
stupid questions. Where are you from, anyhow?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said bitterly, “What’s the use? You won’t believe
<span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>me. I happen to be from a place called Halsey’s Planet,
which is a good long distance from here. About as far as
light will travel in two hundred years, if that gives you an
idea. I came here in an F-T-L—that is, a faster-than-light
ship. You don’t know what that is, of course, but I did. It
was a mistake, I admit it. But here I am.”</p>

<p class="c007">Somewhat to Ross’s surprise, Chuck didn’t laugh again.
He looked dubious, and he scratched his head some more,
but he didn’t laugh. To the other prisoner he said, “What
do you think, Sam?”</p>

<p class="c007">Sam shrugged. “So maybe we were wrong,” he observed.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross demanded, “Wrong about what?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well,” Chuck said hesitantly, “there’s a guy here named
Flarney. He’s a pretty old son-of-a-gun by now, must be
at least ninety, and he’s been here a good long time. Dunno
how long. But he talks crazy, just like you. No offense,”
he added, “it’s just that we all thought he’d gone space-happy.
But maybe we’re wrong. Unless——” his eyes narrowed
“unless the two of you are both space-happy, or
trying to kid us, or something.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said urgently, “I swear, Chuck, there’s no such
thing. It’s true. Who’s this Flarney? Where does he say he
came from?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Who can make sense out of what he says? All I know
is, he talked a lot about something faster than light. That’s
crazy; that’s like saying slower than dark, or bigger than
green, or something. But I don’t know, maybe it means
something.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Believe me, Chuck, it does! Where is this man—can I
see him?”</p>

<p class="c007">Chuck looked uncertain. “Well, sure. That is, you can
see him all right. But it isn’t going to do you a whole hell
of a lot of good, because he’s dead. Died yesterday; they’re
going to pitch him out into space sometime today.”</p>

<p class="c007">Sam said, “This is when Whitker flips. One week without
his old pal Flarney and he’ll begin to look funny. Two
weeks and he starts acting funny. Three and he’s talking
funny and the guards begin to crack down. I give him a
month to get shot down and heaved through the locker.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span>Old pal? Ross demanded, “Who’s this Whitker? Where
can I get in touch with him?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Him and Flarney were both latrine orderlies. That’s
where they put the feeble old men, mopping and polishing.
Number Two head, any hour of the day or night. Old
buzzard has his racket—we’re supposed to get a hank of
cellosponge per man per day, but he’s always ‘fresh out’—unless
you slip him your saccharine ration every once in a
while.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross asked the way to Number Two head and the routine.
But it was an hour before he could bring himself to
ask the hulking guard for permission.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, sonny,” she boomed. “I’ll show you the way. Need
any help?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No, thanks, ma’am,” he said hastily, and she roared
with laughter. So did the members of the construction gang;
it must have been an ancient gag. He hurried on his way
thinking dark and bloody thoughts.</p>

<p class="c007">“Whitker?” he asked a tottering ancient who nodded and
drowsed amid the facilities of the head.</p>

<p class="c007">The old man looked up blearily and squeaked: “Fresh
out. Fresh out. You should’ve saved some from yesterday.”</p>

<p class="c007">“That’s all right. I’m a new man here. I want to ask you
about your friend Flarney——”</p>

<p class="c007">Whitker bowed his head and began to cry noiselessly.</p>

<p class="c007">“I’m sorry, Mr. Whitker. I heard. But there’s something
we can do about it—maybe. Flarney was a faster-than-light
man. He must have told you that. So am I. Ross, from
Halsey’s Planet.”</p>

<p class="c007">He hadn’t the faintest idea as to whether any of this
was getting through to the ancient.</p>

<p class="c007">“It seems Flarney and I were both on the same mission,
finding out how and why planets were dropping out of
communication. You and he used to talk a lot, they tell me.
Did he ever tell you anything about that?”</p>

<p class="c007">Whitker looked up and squeaked dimly. “Oh, yes. All
the time. I humored him. He was an old man, you know.
And now he’s dead.” The tears leaked from his rheumy
eyes and traced the sad furrows beside his nose.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>Was he getting through? “What did he <i>say</i>, Mr. Whitker?
About faster-than-light?”</p>

<p class="c007">The old man said, “L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the
minus T-over-two-N.”</p>

<p class="c007">That damned formula again! “But what does it mean,
Mr. Whitker? What did he say it meant?” Ross softly
urged.</p>

<p class="c007">The old man looked surprised. “Genes?” he asked himself
hazily. “Generations? I don’t remember. But you go
to Earth, young man. Flarney said <i>they’d</i> know, and know
what to do about it, too, which is more than he did. His
very words, young man!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross didn’t dare stay longer. Furthermore he suspected
that the old man’s attention span had been exhausted. He
started from the room with a muttered thanks, and was
stopped at the door by Whitker’s hand on his shoulder.</p>

<p class="c007">“You’re a good boy,” Whitker squeaked. “Here.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross found himself walking down the corridor with an
enormous wad of cellosponge in his hand.</p>

<p class="c007">The bunks were hard, but that didn’t matter. Dormitories
were the outermost layer of the hulk, pseudogravity
varies inversely as the fourth power of the distance, and the
field generator was conventionally located near “Minerva’s”
center. When your relative weight is one-quarter normal
you can sleep deliciously on a gravel driveway. This was the
dormitory’s only attractive feature. Otherwise it was too
many steel slabs, tiered and spotted too close, too many
unwashed males, too much weary snoring. The only things
in short supply were headroom and air.</p>

<p class="c007">Not everybody slept. Insomniacs turned and grunted;
those who had given up the struggle talked from bunk to
bunk in considerately low tones.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie muttered from a third-tier bunk facing Ross’s: “I
wonder if she made it.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross knew what he meant. “Unlikeliest thing in the
world,” he said. “But I think she went fast and never knew
what hit her.” He thought of the formula and “They’d know
on Earth—and know what to do about it too.” Earth the
enigma, from which all planetary peoples were supposed
to be derived. Earth—the dot on the traditional master
<span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span>charts, Earth—from which and to which no longliners ever
seemed to travel. Haarland had told him no F-T-L ship
had in recent centuries ever reported again after setting out
for Earth. Another world sunk in barbarism? But Flarney
had said—no; that was not data. That was the confused
recollections of a very old man, possibly based on the
confused recollections of another very old man. Perhaps
it had got mixed up with the semilegendary origin story.</p>

<p class="c007">Poor sweet Helena! He hoped it had happened fast, that
she had been thinking of some pleasant prospect on Halsey’s
Planet. In her naïve way she’d think it just around
the corner, a mere matter of following instructions....</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">So thought Ross, the pessimist.</p>

<p class="c007">In his gloom he had forgotten that this was exactly what
it was. In his snobbishness he never realized that he was
guilty of the most frightful arrogance in assuming that what
he could do, she could not. In his ignorance he was not
aware that since navigation began, every new instrument,
every technique, has drawn the shuddery warnings of savants
that uneducated skippers, working by rote, could not
be expected to master these latest fruits of science—or that
uneducated skippers since navigation began have cheerfully
adopted new instruments and techniques at the drop of a
hat and that never once have the shuddery warnings been
justified by the facts.</p>

<p class="c007">Up the aisle somebody was saying in a low, argumentative
tone, “I saw the drum myself. Naturally it was
marked Dulsheen Creme, but the guards here never did
give a damn whether their noses were dull or bright enough
to flag down a freighter and I don’t think they’ve suddenly
changed. It was booze, I tell you. Fifty liters of it.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Gawd! The hangovers tomorrow.”</p>

<p class="c007">“We’ll all have to watch our steps. I hope they don’t do
anything worse than getting quietly drunk in their quarters.
Those foot-kissing orderlies’ll get a workout, but who cares
what happens to an orderly?”</p>

<p class="c007">“They haven’t been on a real tear since I’ve been here.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Lucky you. Let’s hope they don’t bust loose tonight. It’s
<span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span>a break in the monotony, sure—but those girls play rough.
Five prisoners died last time.”</p>

<p class="c007">“They beat them up?”</p>

<p class="c007">“One of them.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What about the others? Oh! Oh, Gawd—fifty liters, you
said?”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie began to whimper: “Not again! Not those plug-uglies!
I swear I’ll throw myself through the spacelock if
they make a pass at me. Ross, isn’t there anything we can
do?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Seems not, Bernie. Maybe they won’t come in. Or if
they do, maybe they’ll pass you by. There certainly isn’t
any place to hide.”</p>

<p class="c007">A raucous female voice roared through the annunciator:
“Bed check five minutes, boys. Anybody got any li’l thing
to do down the hall, better do it now. See you lay-terrr!”
Hiccup and drunken giggle.</p>

<p class="c007">For the first time in his life Ross suddenly and spontaneously
acted like a tri-di hero, with the exception that
he felt like a silly ass through it all.</p>

<p class="c007">“Got an idea,” he muttered. “Get out of your bunk.”
He pulled the wad of cellosponge, old Whitker’s present,
from his pocket and yanked it in half, one for him and one
for Bernie.</p>

<p class="c007">The Pullover said faintly: “Thanks, but I don’t have
to——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross didn’t bother to answer. He was carefully fluffing
the stuff out to its maximum dimensions. He unzipped his
coveralls and began wadding them with cellosponge.</p>

<p class="c007">“I get it,” Bernard said softly. He stepped out of his
one-piece garment and followed suit. In less than a minute
they had creditable dummies lying on their bunks.</p>

<p class="c007">The others watched their activity with emotions ranging
between awe and envy. One giant of a man proclaimed
grimly to whoever cared to listen: “These are a couple of
smart guys. I wish them luck. And I want you guys to know
that I will personally break the back of any sneaking rat
who tips off a guard about this.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, Ox. Sure,” came a muted chorus.</p>

<p class="c007">Arranged in a fetal sleeping position, face down, the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span>dummies astonished even their creators. It would take a
lucky look in a fair light to note that the heads were earless,
fibrous globes.</p>

<p class="c007">“They’ll do,” Ross snapped. “Come on, Bernie.”</p>

<p class="c007">They walked quietly from the dormitory in their singlet
underwear toward the dormitory latrine—and past it. Into
the corridor. Through a doorless opening into a storeroom
piled with crates of rations. “This’ll do,” Ross said quietly.
They ducked into a small cavern formed by sloppy issuing
of stock and hunched down.</p>

<p class="c007">“The dummies will fool the bed check. It’s only a sweep
with a hundred-line TV system. If the guards do raid the
dormitory tonight we’ll have to count on them ignoring the
dummies or thinking they’re a joke or being too busy with
other things to care. They’ll be drunk, after all. Then in the
morning things’ll be plenty disorganized. We’ll be able to
sneak back into formation—and that’ll be that for a matter
of years. They can’t often bribe the pilots with enough to
guarantee a real ripsnorting drunk. Now try and get some
sleep. There’s nothing more we can do.”</p>

<p class="c007">They actually did doze off for a couple of hours, and then
were awakened by drunken war whoops.</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s them!” Bernie wailed.</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up. They’re heading for the dormitory. We’re
safe.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Safe!” Bernie echoed derisively. “Safe until when?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross threatened him with the side of his hand and Bernie
was quiet, though his lips were mumbling soundlessly. The
guards lurched giggling past and Ross said:</p>

<p class="c007">“We’ll sneak into the lockroom. There won’t be anybody
there tonight; at least we’ll get a night’s sleep.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Big deal,” grumbled Bernie, but he followed, complaining
inarticulately to himself. Ross thought tiredly: All this
work for a night’s sleep! And saw, half-formed, the dreadful
procession of days and nights and years ahead....</p>

<p class="c007">They reached the lockroom and stumbled in breathlessly.</p>

<p class="c007">“Dearie!” Two guards, playing a card game on the floor
with a ring of empty bottles around them, looked up in
drunken delight. “Dearie!” repeated the bigger of the two.
“Angela, <i>look</i> what <i>we’ve</i> got!”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span>Ross said stupidly. “But you shouldn’t be here——”</p>

<p class="c007">The guard made a clumsy pass at fluffing up her back
hair and giggled. “Duty comes first, dearie. Angela, just
lock that door, will you?” The other guard scrambled unevenly
to her feet and weaved over to the door. It was
locked before Ross or Bernie could move.</p>

<p class="c007">The big guard stood up too, leering at Bernie. “Wow!”
she said. “New merchandise. Just be patient, dearie. We’ve
got a little something to attend to in a couple of minutes,
but we’ll have <i>lots</i> of time after that.”</p>

<p class="c007">Then things began to happen rapidly. There was Angela
the guard, inarticulate, falling-down drunk; she waved
bonelessly at a brightly flickering light on the far side of the
lockroom. There was the other guard, reaching out for
Bernie with one hand, pawing at a bottle with the other.
There was Ross, a paralyzed spectator.</p>

<p class="c007">And there was Bernie.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie’s eyes bulged wide as the guard came toward him.
He babbled hysterically, “No! Nonononono! I said I’d kill
myself and I——”</p>

<p class="c007">He stiff-armed the big guard and leaped for the lock
door. Ross suddenly came to life. “Bernie!” he bellowed.
“Hold it! Don’t jump!”</p>

<p class="c007">But it was too late. The one guard sprawling, the other
staggering helplessly across the floor, Bernie was clear. He
scrabbled at the lockwheels, spun them open. Ross tensed
himself for the sudden, awful rush of expanding air; he
leaped after Bernie just as Bernie flung the lock door open
and jumped.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross jumped after.</p>

<p class="c007">There was no rush of air. They were not in space.
Around them was no ripping, sucking void, no flaming
backdrop of stars; around them were six walls and a Wesley
board, and Helena peering at them wide-eyed and delighted.</p>

<p class="c007">“Well!” she said. “<i>That</i> was fast!”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">Ross said, “But——”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena, hanging from the acceleration loops, smiled
<span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span>maternally. “Oh, it was nothing,” she said. “Ross don’t you
think we’re far enough away yet?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said hopelessly, “All right,” and cut the drive. The
starship hung in space in the limbo between stars. Azor,
“Minerva,” and the rest were light-years behind, far out
of range of challenge.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena wriggled free from the loops and rubbed her arms
where the retaining straps had gripped them. “After all,”
she said demurely, “you <i>told</i> me how to run the ship, and
<i>really</i>, Ross, I’m not quite <i>stupid</i>.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said, “But——”</p>

<p class="c007">“But what, Ross? It isn’t as if I were some sort of brainless
little thing that had never run a machine in her life.
My goodness, Ross——” She wrinkled her nose. “<i>You</i>
should remember. All those days in the dye vats? Don’t you
think I had to learn a little something about machines
<i>there</i>?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross swore incredulously. To compare those clumsy
constructs of wheels and rollers with the subtle subelectronic
flows of the Wesley force—and to make it work!
He said, unbelievingly, “And the ‘Minerva’ helped you
vector in? They gave you the co-ordinates and radared
your course?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Certainly.” Helena turned to Bernie, who was staring
dazedly around him. “Are you all right, dear?” she asked.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross turned his back on them and faced the Wesley
Christmas tree of controls. Don’t question it, he told himself;
take a miracle for what it is. God wanted you out of
“Minerva”—and God moves in most mysterious ways His
wonders to perform.</p>

<p class="c007">Anyway, they had to get going. When the court had
exiled Helena in the starship they had gone through the
customary rituals; not only was everything that looked like
a weapon gone, along with all but a teacup of fuel for the
auxiliary jets, but the food locker was stripped entirely.
He put everything else out of his mind and began to calculate
a setting.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie said over his shoulder, “Home, huh? That place
you call Halsey’s Planet?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross shook his head. “Not this time. I got this far and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>I’m still alive; maybe I can finish the job. Anyway, I’ll try.
The first solid suggestion I’ve had ever since I took off was
what that half-witted old moron——” He ignored a little
gasp from Helena. “——said back on ‘Minerva.’ If Flarney
had lived, he would have gone there; we’ll go there
now.” He finished manipulating the calculator and began
to set it up on the board. He said, “The name of the place
is—Earth.”</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_108">108</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 10"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 10</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">IT took Ross a while to learn a lesson,
but when he learned it, it stuck. This time, he promised
himself, <i>no spaceport</i>.</p>

<p class="c007">They sneaked into the solar system that held fabulous
old Earth from far outside the ecliptic, where the chance
of radar detection was least; they came to a relative dead
halt millions of miles from the planet and cautiously
scanned the surrounding volume of space with their own
radar.</p>

<p class="c007">No ships seemed to be in space. Earth’s solar system
turned out to be a trivial affair, only five planets, scarcely
a half-dozen moons among them. None of the planets
except Earth itself was anything like inhabitable.</p>

<p class="c007">“Hold tight,” said Ross grimly, “I’m not so good at this
fine navigation.” He cautiously applied power along a single
vector; the starship leaped and bucked. He corrected
with another; and the distant sun swelled in their view
plates with frightening rapidity. The alarm beeps bleated
furiously, and the automatic cutoff restored all controls to
neutral.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, sweating, picked himself up from the floor and
staggered back to the panel. Helena said carefully, “You’re
doing <i>fine</i>, Ross, but if you’d like <i>me</i> to take over for a
minute——”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>Ross swallowed his pride and stood back. After one
wide-eyed stare of shock—she wasn’t even calculating!—he
gripped the loops and closed his eyes and waited for
death.</p>

<p class="c007">There was a punishing bump and his eyes flew open.
Helena was looking at him apologetically. “You would
have done it better,” she lied, “but anyway we’re down.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross lied, “Of course, but I’m glad you had the practice.
Where—uh, where are we?”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena silently showed him the radar plot. Earth, it
seemed, had a confusing multiplicity of continents; they
were on one in the northern hemisphere, a large one as
Earth’s continents went, and smack in the middle of it.
It was night on their side of Earth just then; and, by the
plot, a largish city was only a dozen or so miles away.</p>

<p class="c007">“Okay,” said Ross wearily, “landing party away. Helena,
you stay here while Bernie and I——”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said simply, “No.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross stared at her a minute, then shrugged. “All right.
Then Bernie will stay while——”</p>

<p class="c007">“I will not!” said Bernie.</p>

<p class="c007">Clearly it was time for a showdown. Ross roared:
“Who’s the captain here, anyway?”</p>

<p class="c007">“You are,” Helena said promptly. “As long as I don’t
have to stay here alone.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” said Bernie.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said, “Oh.” He thought for a while and then said,
“Well, let’s all go.” They thought it was a wonderful idea.</p>

<p class="c007">Earth wasn’t a very unusual planet—lots of green sand
and purple vegetation. Either the master star chart was
wrong or the gravity meter was off; the former, strangely
enough, gave Earth’s gravity as 1.000000 and the latter as
0.8952, a whopping ten per cent discrepancy. Further, the
principal inert gas in Earth’s atmosphere was, according
to the master chart’s planetary supplement, nitrogen; and
according to the ship’s instruments was indubitably neon.
A terrific aurora polaris display constantly flickering in
the northern sky bore that out.</p>

<p class="c007">But the gap between the chart and the facts didn’t particularly
worry Ross as they swung along overland. So the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>chart was off, or perhaps things had changed. This was—according
to Flarney via Whitker—the place where people
knew about the formula, where his questions would be
answered. After this, he thought happily, it’s off to Halsey’s
Planet and an unspecified glorious future, revered as the
savior of humanity instead of a lousy Yards clerk pushing
invoices around. And Helena, he thought sentimentally....</p>

<p class="c007">He turned to smile at her and found she and Bernie were
giggling.</p>

<p class="c007">“Listen, you two!” Captain Ross roared. “Haven’t you
learned anything yet? What’s the good of us exploring if
we stroll along with our silly heads in the clouds, not paying
attention? Do you realize that this place may be as dangerous
as Azor or worse?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Ross——” Helena said.</p>

<p class="c007">“Don’t interrupt! What this outfit needs is some discipline—tightening
up. You two have got to accept your
responsibilities. Keep alert! Be on the lookout! Any single
thing out of the ordinary may be a deathtrap. Watch
for——”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was looking not at Ross but over his shoulder.
Bernie was making strangled noises and pointing.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross turned. Behind him stood a mechanical monstrosity
vaguely recognizable as a heavily-armed truck, its motor
faintly humming. A man leaned darkly from the cab and
transfixed them to the ground with a powerful spotlight.
From the dazzling circle of light his voice came, hasty and
furtive. “Thought it was two women and a man, but I
guess you’re the ones. Ugh, those faces on you! Yes, you’re
the ones. Get in. Fast.”</p>

<p class="c007">The light blinked out. When their eyes adjusted to the
dimmer illumination of the stars and the aurora display
they saw a side door in the body of the truck standing open.
Too, one of the long, slim gun barrels with which the truck
seemed copiously supplied swiveled to cover them.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross stupidly read aloud a sign on the truck: “Jones
Floor-Cover Company. Finest Tile on Jones. Wall-to-Wall
a Specialty. ‘Rugs Fit For a Jones’.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” the man said. “Yeah, yeah. Just don’t try to buy
any. Get in, for Jones’ sake! If I’d of known you were half-wits
<span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>I wouldn’t of taken this job for a million Joneses, cash.
Get in!” His voice was hysterical and the gun covering
them moved ominously. “If this is a frame——” he began
to shrill.</p>

<p class="c007">“Get in,” Ross said shakily to the others. They climbed
in and the door slammed violently and automatically.
Helena began to cry in a preoccupied sort of way and Bernie
began a long, mumbling inventory of his own mental
weaknesses for ever getting involved in this crackbrained,
imbecilic, feeble-minded....</p>

<p class="c007">There were windows in the truck body and Ross turned
from one to another. He saw the guns on the cab telescope
into stubs, the stubs fold into the mounts, the mounts
smoothly descend flush with the sheet metal. He saw the
cursing driver manipulate a dozen levers as the car began
to glide across the green sand, purple-dotted with vegetation.
Finally, through the rear window, he saw three figures
racing across the sand waving their arms, rapidly being left
behind. All he could make out was that they seemed to
be two women and a man.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was wailing softly, “——and I am <i>not</i> ugly and
just because we’re young and we’re strangers isn’t any reason
to go around insulting people——”</p>

<p class="c007">From Bernie: “——fatheaded, goggly-eyed, no-browed,
slobber-lipped, dim-witted——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up,” Ross said softly. “Before I bang both your
heads together.”</p>

<p class="c007">They stared.</p>

<p class="c007">“Thank you. We’ve got to think. What’s this spot we’re
in? What can we do about it? I don’t have any F-T-L contact
name for Earth and obviously this fellow picked us up
by mistake. I saw two women and a man—remember what
he said?—just now trying to catch up with us. He seems
to be some kind of criminal. Otherwise why a disguised
gun-carrier? Why floor coverings ‘but don’t try to buy any’?
And Jones seems to be the name of the local political subdivision,
the name of the local deity and the currency.
That’s important. It points to a rigid one-man dictatorship—Jones,
of course, or possibly his dynasty. What
<span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>course of action should we take? Kick it around. Helena,
what do you think?”</p>

<p class="c007">“He shouldn’t have said we were ugly,” she pouted.
“Isn’t <i>that</i> important?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Women!” Ross said grimly. “If you’ll kindly forget the
trivial affront to your vanity perhaps we can figure something
out.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena said stubbornly: “But he <i>shouldn’t</i>. We’re not.
What if they just <i>think</i> we are because they all look alike
and we don’t look like them?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross collapsed. After a long pause during which he tried
and almost failed to control his temper he said slowly:
“Thank you, Helena. You’re wrong, of course, but it was
a contribution. You see, you can’t build up such a wild, far-fetched
theory from the few facts available.” His voice was
beginning to choke with anger. “It isn’t reasonable and it
isn’t really any help. In fact it’s the God-damndest stupidest
imitation of reasoning I have ever——”</p>

<p class="c007">“City,” Bernard croaked, pointing. The jolting ride had
become smoother, and gliding past the windows were green
tiled buildings and street lights.</p>

<p class="c007">“Fine,” Ross said bitterly. “We had a few clear minutes
to think and now we find they were wasted by the crackpot
dissertation of a female and my reasonable attempt to
show her the elements of logical thinking.” He put his head
in his hands and tried to ignore them, tried to reason it out.
But the truck made a couple of sharp turns and jolted to
a stop.</p>

<p class="c007">The door opened and the voice of their driver said, again
from behind a flashlight’s dazzling circle: “Out. Walk
ahead of me.”</p>

<p class="c007">They did, into a fair-sized, well-lighted room with eight
people in it whom they studied in amazement. Every one
of the eight was exactly the same height—six feet. Every
one had straight red hair of exactly the same shade, sprouting
from an identical hairline. Every one had precisely the
same build—gangling but broad-shouldered. Their sixteen
eyes were the identical blue under sixteen identical eyebrows.
Head to toe, they were duplicates. One of them
spoke—in exactly the same voice as the truckdriver’s.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>“So you want to be Joneses, do you?” he said.</p>

<p class="c007">“Absolutely impossible.”</p>

<p class="c007">“But we took their money.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Give it back. Reasonable changes, yes, but look at
them!”</p>

<p class="c007">“We can’t give it back. Look what we spent already.
Anyway, Sam,——” It sounded like “Sam” to Ross.
“——anyway, Sam, look at some of the work you’ve done
already. You can do it. I doubt if anybody else could, but
you can.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross felt his eyes crossing, and gave up the effort of
trying to tell which Jones was speaking to which. Even the
clothing was nearly identical—purple pantaloons, scarlet
jacket, black cummerbund sash, black shoes. Then he noticed
that Third-from-the-left Jones—the one who seemed
to be named Sam—wore a frilly shirt of white under the
scarlet jacket. Only a lacy edge showed at the open collar;
but where his was white, the others were all muted pastels
of pink and green.</p>

<p class="c007">Sam said coldly, “I know nobody else can do it. Anybody
else! Who else <i>is</i> there?”</p>

<p class="c007">A Jones with a frill of chartreuse pursed his lips. “Well,”
he said thoughtfully, “there’s Northside Tim Jones——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Northside Tim Jones,” Sam mimicked. “Eight of his
jobs are in the stockade right now! Paraffin, for Jones’s
sake—he still uses paraffin to mold a face!”</p>

<p class="c007">“I know, Sam, but after all, these people need help. If
you won’t do it for them, what’s left?”</p>

<p class="c007">Sam shrugged morosely. “Well——” he said. Then he
shook his head, sighed, and came forward to look at the
three travelers. With an expression of revulsion he said,
“Strip.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross hesitated. “Hold it!” he said sharply to Helena, already
half out of her coveralls. “Sir, there may have been
some mistake. Would you mind explaining just what you
propose to do?”</p>

<p class="c007">“The usual thing,” Sam said irritably. “Fix your hair,
build up your frames, level you off at standard Jones height.
The works. Though I must say,” he added bitterly, “I never
saw such unpromising specimens in my life. How the Jones
<span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>have you managed to stay out of trouble this long? Whose
garrets have you been hiding in?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross licked his lips. “You mean,” he said, “you want to
make us look more like you gentlemen, is that it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“<i>I</i> want!” Sam repeated in bafflement. Over his shoulder
he roared, “Ben, what kind of creeps are you saddling me
with?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ben, looking worried, said, “Holy Jones, Sam, I don’t
get it either. It was a perfectly normal deal. This guy came
up to me in Jones’s Joint and made a pitch. He knew the
setup all right, and he had the money with him. Six hundred
Joneses, cold cash; and it wasn’t funny money, either.”
His face clouded. “I did think, though,” he mentioned,
“that he said two women and one man. But Paul Jones
picked them up right at the rendezvous, so it must’ve been
the right ones.”</p>

<p class="c007">He glowered suspiciously at Ross and the others. “Come
to think of it,” he said, “maybe not. Tell you what, Sam,
you just sit tight here for twenty minutes or so.” And he
hurried out of the room.</p>

<p class="c007">One of the other Joneses said curtly, “Sit down.” Ross,
Bernie, and Helena found chairs lined up against a wall;
they sat. A different Jones rummaged in a stack of papers
on a table; he handed something to each of them. “Relax,”
he advised. Obediently the three spacefarers opened the
magazines he gave them. When they were settled, most of
the Joneses, after a whispered conference, went out. The one
that was left said, “No talking. If we made a mistake, we’re
sorry. Meanwhile, you do what you’re told.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross found that his magazine was called <i>By Jones</i>; it
seemed to be a periodical devoted to entertaining news and
gossip of sports, fashion, and culture. He stared at an article
headed “Be Glad the People’s Police Are Watching
YOU!”, but the words made little sense. He tried to think;
but somehow he couldn’t find a point at which to grasp
the flickering mass of impressions that were circling
through his brain. Nothing seemed to make a great deal
of sense any more; and Ross suddenly realized that he was
very, very tired.</p>

<p class="c007">His mind an utter blank, he sat and waited.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span>It was twenty minutes and a bit more. Then the door
flew open and half a dozen Joneses burst in. Even at first
sight, Ross could tell that three of them were newcomers.
For one thing, two were women; and the third, though red-haired,
tall and gangling, had a nose a full centimeter
shorter than any of the others, and his hair was crisply
curled.</p>

<p class="c007">“All right, you Peepeece!” snarled the first Jones. “You
found what you were looking for—now try to get out!”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena did the talking. It wasn’t Ross’s idea, but when
her heel crunched down on his instep he was too startled
to object, and from then on he didn’t get a chance to get
a word in edgewise.</p>

<p class="c007">He had to admit that her act was getting across with the
audience. Long before she had finished reporting their
meeting, their flight to Azor, the escape from “Minerva,”
and the flight here, most of the Joneses had put their guns
away, and all were showing signs of stupefaction.
“——And then,” she finished, “we saw this truck, and that
very good-looking man picked us up. And so we’re here
on Earth; and, honest to goodness, that’s the exact truth.”</p>

<p class="c007">There was silence while the Joneses looked at each other.
Then the plastic-surgeon-type Jones, Sam with the white
shirt front, stepped forward. “Hold still, my dear,” he ordered.
Helena bravely stood rigid while the surgeon raked
searchingly through the roots of her hair, peered into her
eyes, expertly traced the configuration of her ribs.</p>

<p class="c007">He stepped back, shaken. “One thing is for sure,” he
told the others, “they’re not Peepeece. Not with those
bones. They’d never get in.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones beat his forehead and moaned. “How do I
get into these things?” he demanded.</p>

<p class="c007">One of the female Joneses said shrilly, “We didn’t expect
anything like this. We’re honest Jones-fearing Joneses
and——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up!” Ben Jones roared. “What about the other
two, Sam? They all right too?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, for Jones’s sake, Ben,” Sam said disgustedly, “just
look at them, will you? Do you think the police would take
in a five-inch height deviation like that one——” he pointed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span>to Bernie——“or a half-bald scarecrow like that?” Ross,
stung, opened his mouth to object; but swiftly closed it
again. Nobody was paying much attention to him, anyhow,
except as Exhibit A.</p>

<p class="c007">“So what do we do?” Ben demanded.</p>

<p class="c007">Sam shrugged. “The first thing we do,” he said wearily,
“is to take care of our, uh, clients here. We get them out of
the way, and then we decide what to do next.” He looked
around at the other Joneses. “If you three will come this
way,” he said, “we’ll finish up your job and get you back
home. I needn’t remind you, of course, that if you should
happen to mention anything you’ve seen here tonight to
the Peepeece it would——” His voice was cut off by the
closing door before Ross could catch the nature of the
threat.</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones stayed behind, scowling to himself. “You
people got any Joneses?” he demanded abruptly.</p>

<p class="c007">“You mean money? Not any at all,” Helena said honestly.
Ross could have kicked her.</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones growled deep in his throat. “Always it happens
to me!” he complained. “I suppose we’re going to
have to feed you, too.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well,” Helena said diffidently, “we haven’t eaten in a
long time——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones swore to his god, whose name was Jones, but
he stepped to the door and ordered food. When it came it
was surprisingly good; each of the three, with their diverse
backgrounds, found it delicious. While they were eating,
Ben Jones sat watching them, refreshing himself from time
to time with a greenish bubbling liquid out of a jug. He
offered some to Ross; who clutched his throat as though
he’d swallowed molten steel.</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones guffawed till his eyes ran. “First taste of
Jones’s Juice, hey? Kind of gets right down inside, doesn’t
it?” He wiped his eyes, then sobered. “I guess you people
are all right,” he admitted. “What I’m going to do with you
I don’t know. I can’t take you to Earth, and I can’t keep
you here, and I can’t throw you out on the street—the
Peepeece would have you in the stockade in ten minutes.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, startled, said, “Aren’t we on Earth?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span>“Naw,” Ben Jones said disgustedly. “Didn’t you hear
me? You’re on Jones, halfway between Jones’s Forks and
Jonesgrad. But you came pretty close, at that. Earth’s about
fifty miles out the Jones Pike past Jonesgrad, turn right at
Jonesboro Minor.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said bewilderedly, “The planet Earth is fifty miles
along the Pike?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Not a planet,” Ben Jones said. “It’s an old city, kind
of. Nobody lives there any more; the Peepeece don’t permit
it. I’ve never been there, but they say it’s kind of, you know,
different. Some of the buildings——” he seemed actually
to be blushing——“are as much as fifteen, twenty stories
high; and the walls aren’t even all green. Excuse me,” he
added, looking at Helena.</p>

<p class="c007">Sam Jones returned and said to Ben, “It’s all right. All
finished. Trivial alterations. Maybe they could have gone
along for the rest of their lives on wigs and pads—but we
don’t tell them that, do we? And anyway now they won’t
worry. Healy Jones, the older man, for instance. Very
bright fellow, but it seems he was working as a snathe-handler’s
apprentice. Afraid to take the master’s test, afraid
to change his line of work—might be noticed and questioned.”
He heaved a tremendous sigh and poured himself
a tremendous slug of the green fluid. Ben Jones gave Ross
a cynical wink and shrug.</p>

<p class="c007">“Look at my hand!” the surgeon exploded. It was shaking.
He gulped the Jones Juice and poured himself another.
“Nothing physical,” he said. “Neurosis. The subconscious
coldly counting up my crimes and coldly imposing and
executing sentence. I’m a surgeon, so my hand trembles.”
He drank. “Jones is not mocked,” he said broodingly.
“Jones is not mocked. Think those three are going to be
happy? Think they’re going to be folded in Jones’s bosom
just because they’re Joneses externally now? No. Watch
them five years, ten years. Maybe they’ll sentence themselves
to be hateful, vitriol-tempered lice and wonder
why nobody loves them. Maybe they’ll sentence themselves
to penal servitude and wonder why everybody pushes them
around, why they haven’t the guts to hit back—Jones is
<span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>not mocked,” he told the jug of green liquid, ignoring the
others, and drank again.</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones said softly to them, “Come on,” and led them
into an adjoining room furnished with sleeping pads. He
said apologetically, “The doctor’s nerves are shot tonight.
Trouble is, he’s too Jones-fearing. Me, I can take it or leave
it alone.” His laugh had a little too much bravado in it.
“There’s a little bit of nonJones in the best of us, I always
say—but not to the doctor. And not when he’s hitting the
Jones juice.” He shrugged cynically and said, “What the
hell? L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the minus T-over-two-N.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross had him by his shirt frill. “Say that again!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones shoved him away. “What’s the matter with
you, boy?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I’m sorry. Would you please repeat that formula? What
you said?” he hastily amended when the word “formula”
obviously failed to register.</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones repeated the formula wonderingly.</p>

<p class="c007">“What does it mean?” Ross demanded. “I’ve been chasing
the damned thing across the Galaxy.” He hastily filled
Ben Jones in on its previous appearances.</p>

<p class="c007">“Well,” Ben Jones said, “it means what it says, of
course. I mean, it’s obvious, isn’t it?” He studied their
faces and added uncertainly, “Isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“What does it mean to <i>you</i>, Ben?” Ross asked softly.</p>

<p class="c007">“Why, what it means to anybody, pal. Right’s right,
wrong’s wrong, Jones is in his Heaven, conform or else—it
means morality, man. What else could it mean?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross then proceeded to make an unmannerly nuisance
of himself. He grilled their involuntary host mercilessly,
shrugging aside all attempted diversions of the talk into
what they were going to do with the three visitors. He ignored
protestations that Ben was no Jonesologist, Jones
knew, and drilled in. By the time Ben Jones exploded,
stamped out, and locked them in for the night, he had
elicited the following:</p>

<p class="c007">Everybody knew the formula; they were taught it at their
mother’s knee. It was recited antiphonally before and after
Jones Meetings. Ben knew it was right, of course, and some
<span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span>day he was going to get right with Jones and live up to it,
but not just yet, because if he didn’t make money in the
prosthesis racket somebody else would. The formula was
everywhere: on the lintels of public buildings, hanging in
classrooms, and on the bedroom walls of the most Jones-fearing
old ladies where they could see its comforting message
last thing at night and first thing in the morning.</p>

<p class="c007">From a book? Well yes, he guessed so; sure it was in the
Book of Joneses, but who could say whether that was where
it started. Most people thought it was just Handed Down.
Way back during the war—what war? The War of the
Joneses, of course! Anyway, in the war the last of the
holdouts against the formula had been destroyed. No, he
didn’t know anything about the war. No, not his grandfather’s
time or his grandfather’s grandfather’s time. Long
ago, that war was. Maybe there were records in the old
museum in Earth. The city, of course, not some damn
planet he never heard of!</p>

<p class="c007">After Ben Jones slammed out and the room darkened
Helena and Bernie exchanged comforting words from adjoining
sleeping pads, to Ross’s intense displeasure. They
fell asleep and at last he fell asleep still churning over the
problem.</p>

<p class="c007">When he woke he found that evidently the doctor, Sam
Jones, had stumbled in during the night and passed out on
the pad next to him. The white frill was stiff and green with
dried Jones Juice. Helena and Bernie still slept. He tried
the door.</p>

<p class="c007">It was locked, but there was a tantalizing hum of voices
beyond it. He put his ear to the cold steel. The fruits of his
eavesdropping were scanty but alarming.</p>

<p class="c007">“——cut ’em down mumble found someplace mumble.”</p>

<p class="c007">“——mumble never killed yet mumble prosthesis
racket.”</p>

<p class="c007">“——Jones’s sake, it’s their lives or mumble mumble
time to get scared mumble Peepeece are you?”</p>

<p class="c007">And then apparently the speakers moved out of range.
Ross was cold with sweat, and there was an abnormal hollow
in the pit of his stomach that breakfast would never
fill.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>He spun around as a Jones voice croaked painfully:
“Hear anything good, stranger?”</p>

<p class="c007">The surgeon, looking very dilapidated, was sitting up and
regarding him through bloodshot eyes. “They’re talking
about killing us,” he said shortly.</p>

<p class="c007">“They are not really intelligent,” Sam Jones said wearily.
“They were just bright enough to entangle me to the point
where I had to work for them—and to keep me copiously
supplied with that green stuff I haven’t the intelligence to
use in moderation.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said, “How’d you like to break away from this?”</p>

<p class="c007">Sam Jones mutely extended his hand. It trembled like
a leaf. He said, “For his own inscrutable reason, Jones
grants me steadiness of hand during an operation designed
to frustrate his grand design. He then overwhelms me with
a titanic thirst for oblivion to my shame.”</p>

<p class="c007">“There’s no design,” Ross said. “Or if there is, luckily
this planet is a trifling part of it. I have never heard of such
arrogant pip-squeakery in my life. You flyspecks in your
shabby corner of the Galaxy think your own fouled-up
mess is the pattern of universal life. You’re wrong! I’ve
seen life elsewhere and I know it isn’t.”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor passed his trembling hand over his eyes.
“Jones is not mocked,” he croaked. “L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero
e to the minus T-over-two-N. You can’t fight <i>that</i>,
stranger. You can’t fight that.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross realized he was silently crying behind his covering
hand.</p>

<p class="c007">He said, much more gently, “It’s nothing you have to
fight. It’s something you have to understand.” He told Sam
Jones of his two previous encounters with the formula.
The doctor looked up, his eyes full of wonder. Ross said,
“How would you like to be free, doctor? Free of your
shaking hands, free of your guilt, free of these killers? How
would you like to know the truth?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor said faintly, “If I dared——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross pressed, “The museum in Earth city. Get me records,
facts, anything about the War of the Joneses. If there’s
any meaning to the formula it’ll have to lie in that. It seems
there was a battle about its interpretation and we know
<span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span>who won. Let’s find out what the other side said. Get me
in there.” He was thinking of the disgraceful war of fanaticism
that had marred his own planet’s history. The doctor’s
weak Jones jaw was firming up, though his eyes were still
haunted. “Stall your killer friends, doctor,” Ross urged.
“Tell them you can use us for experiments that’ll cut the
cost of the operations. That ought to bring them around.
And get me the facts!”</p>

<p class="c007">“To be free,” the doctor said wistfully. He said after a
pause, “I’ll try. But——” And rapped a code series on the
steel door.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 11"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 11</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THE doctor said with weak belligerence,
“Who do you think I am? Jones? I <i>had</i> to leave your
friends behind. I had enough trouble getting those hoods
to let me take <i>you</i> along. After all, I’m not a miracle-worker.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said sullenly, “Okay, okay.” He glowered out of
the car window and spat out a tendril of red hair that had
come loose from the fringe surrounding his mouth. The
trouble with a false beard was that it itched, worse than
the real article, worse than any torment Ross had ever
known. But at least Ross, externally and at extreme range,
was enough of a Jones to pass a casual glance.</p>

<p class="c007">And what would Helena and Bernie be thinking now?
He hadn’t had a chance to whisper to them; they’d been just
waking when the doctor dragged him out. Ross put that
problem out of his mind; there were problems enough right
on hand.</p>

<p class="c007">He cautiously felt his red wig to see if it was on straight.
The doctor didn’t seem to look away from his driving, but
he said: “Leave it alone. That’s the first thing the Peepeece
look for, somebody who obviously isn’t sure if his hair is
still on or not. It won’t come off.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Umph,” said Ross. The road was getting worse, it
<span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span>seemed; they had passed no houses for several miles now.
They rounded a rutted turn, and ahead was a sign.</p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div>STOP!</div>
    <div><span class="sc">restricted area ahead</span></div>
    <div><span class="sc">Warning: This Road Is Mined</span></div>
    <div><span class="sc">No Traffic Allowed! Detour</span></div>
    <div>“Trespassers beyond this point will be shot</div>
    <div>without further notice.” Decree #404-5</div>
    <div>    People’s Commissariat of</div>
    <div>      Culture and Solidarity.</div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">The doctor spat contemptuously out the window and
roared past. Ross said, “Hey!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, relax,” said the doctor. “That’s just the Cultureniks.
Nobody pays any attention to <i>them</i>.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross swallowed and sat as lightly as possible on the
green leather cushion of the car. By the time they had gone
a quarter of a mile, he began to feel a little reassured that
the doctor knew what he was talking about. Then the doctor
swerved sharply to miss a rusted hulk and almost skidded
off the road. He swore and manhandled the wheel until
they were back on the straightaway.</p>

<p class="c007">White lipped, Ross asked, “What was that?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Car,” grunted the doctor. “Hit a mine. Silly fools!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross squawked, “But you said——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up,” the doctor ordered tensely. “That was weeks
ago; they haven’t had a chance to lay new mines since
then.” Pause. “I hope.”</p>

<p class="c007">The car roared on. Ross closed his eyes, limply abandoning
himself to what was in store. But if it was bad to see
what was going on, the roaring, swerving, jolting race was
ten times worse with his eyes closed. He opened them again
in time to see another sign flash past, gone before he could
read it.</p>

<p class="c007">“What was that?” he demanded.</p>

<p class="c007">“What’s the difference?” the doctor grunted. “Want to go
back?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well, no——” Ross thought for a moment. “Do we
have to go this fast, though?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>“If we want to get there. Crossed a Peepeece radar screen
ten miles back; they’ll be chasing us by now.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh, I see,” Ross said weakly. “Look, Doc, tell me one
thing—why do they make this place so hard to get to?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Tabu area,” the doctor said shortly. “Not allowed.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Why not allowed?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Because it’s not allowed. Don’t want people poking
through the old records.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Why not just put the old records in a safe place—or
burn the damn things up?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Because they didn’t, that’s why. Shut up! Expect me to
tell you why the Peepeece do anything? They don’t know
themselves. It isn’t Jonesly to destroy, I guess.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross shut up. He leaned against the window, letting
the air rush over his head. They were moving through
forest, purplish squatty trees with long, rustling leaves. The
sky overhead was crisp and cool looking; it was still early
morning. Ross exhaled a long breath. Back on Halsey’s
Planet he would be getting up about now, rising out of a
soft, warm bed, taking his leisurely time about breakfast,
climbing into a comfortable car to make his way to the
spaceport where he was safe, respected, and at home....
Damn Haarland!</p>

<p class="c007">At least, Ross thought, some sort of a pattern was beginning
to shape up. The planets were going out of communication
each for its own reason; but wasn’t there a basic
reason-for-the-reasons that was the same in each case?
Wasn’t there some overall design—some explanation that
covered all the facts, pointed to a way out?</p>

<p class="c007">He sat up straight as they approached a string of little
signs. He scanned them worriedly as they rolled past.</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Workers, Peasants, Joneses all——”</div>
      <div class="line">“By these presents know ye——”</div>
      <div class="line">“If you don’t stop in spite of all——”</div>
      <div class="line">“THIS to hell will blow ye!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">“Duck!” the doctor yelled, crouching down in the seat
and guiding the careening car with one hand. Ross, startled,
followed his example, but not before he saw that “THIS”
was an automatic, radar-actuated rapid-fire gun mounted
a few yards past the last sign. There was a stuttering roar
<span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>from the gun and a splatter of metal against the armored
sides of the car. The doctor sat up again as soon as the
burst had hit; evidently only one was to be feared. “Yah,
yah,” he jeered at the absent builders of the gun. “Lousy
fifty-millimeters can’t punch their way through a tin can!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, gasping, got up just in time to see the last sign
in the series:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“By order of People’s Democratic Council</div>
      <div class="line in1">Of Arts &amp; Sciences, Small Arms Division.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">He said wildly, “They can’t even write a poem properly.
Did you notice the first and third line rhyme-words?”</p>

<p class="c007">Surprisingly, the doctor glanced at him and laughed with
a note of respect. He took a hand off the wheel to pat Ross
on the shoulder. “You’ll make a Jones yet, my boy,” he
promised. “Don’t worry about these things; I told you this
place was restricted. This stuff isn’t worth bothering about.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross found that he was able to smile. There was a point,
he realized with astonishment, where courage came easily;
it was the only thing left. He sat up straighter and breathed
the air more deeply. Then it happened.</p>

<p class="c007">They rounded another curve; the doctor slammed on
the brakes. Suspended overhead across the road was a
single big sign:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">THAT’S ALL, JONES!</div>
      <div class="line">——<span class="sc">People’s Police</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">The car bucked, slewed around, and skidded. The wheels
locked, but not in time to keep it from sliding into the pit,
road wide and four feet deep, that was dug in front of them.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross heard the axles crack and the tires blow; but the
springing of the car was equal to the challenge. He was
jarred clear in the air and tumbled to the floor in a heap;
but no bones were broken.</p>

<p class="c007">Painfully he pushed the door open and crawled out. The
doctor limped after and the two of them stood on the edge
of the pit, looking at the ruin of their car.</p>

<p class="c007">“That one,” said the doctor, “was worth bothering
about.” He motioned Ross to silence and cocked an ear.
Was there a distant roaring sound, like another car following
on the road they had traveled? Ross wasn’t sure; but
the doctor’s expression convinced him. “Peepeece,” he said
<span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>briefly. “From here on it’s on foot. They won’t follow beyond
here; but let’s get out of sight. They’ll by-Jones <i>shoot</i>
beyond here if they see us!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross stared unbelievingly. “This is Earth?” he asked.</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor fanned himself and blew. “That’s it,” he said,
looking around curiously. “Heard a lot about it, but I’ve
never been here before,” he explained. “Funny-looking,
isn’t it?” He nudged Ross, indicating a shattered concrete
structure beside them on the road. “Notice that toll
booth?” he whispered slyly. “Eight sides!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said wearily, “Yes, mighty funny! Look, Doc, why
don’t you sort of wander around by yourself for a while?
That big thing up ahead is the museum you were talking
about, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor squinted. His eyes were unnaturally bright,
and his breathing was fast, but he was making an attempt
to seem casual in the presence of these manifold obscenities
of design. He licked his lips. “<i>Round pillars</i>,” he marveled.
“Why, yes, I think that’s the museum. You go on up
there, like you say. I’ll, uh, sort of see what there is to see.
Jones, yes!” He staggered off, staring from ribald curbing
to scatological wall in an orgy of prurience.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross sighed and walked through the deserted, weed-grown
streets to the stone building that bore on its cracked
lintel the one surviving word, “Earth.” This was all wrong,
he was almost certain; Earth <i>had</i> to be a planet, not a city.
But still....</p>

<p class="c007">The museum had to have the answers.</p>

<p class="c007">On its moldering double doors was a large lead seal. He
read: “Surplus Information Repository. Access denied to
unauthorized personnel.” But the seal had been forced by
somebody; one of the doors swung free, creaking.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross invoked the forcer of the door. If <i>he</i> could do it....</p>

<p class="c007">He went in and stumbled over a skeleton, presumably
that of the last entrant. The skull had been crushed by a
falling beam. There was some sort of mechanism involved—a
trigger, a spring, a release hook. All had rusted
badly, and the spring had lost its tension over the years. A
century? Two? Five? Ross prayed that any similar mantraps
had likewise rusted solid, and cautiously inched
<span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>through the dismal hall of the place, ready for a backward
leap at the first whisper of a concealed mechanism in action.</p>

<p class="c007">It was unnecessary. The place was—dead.</p>

<p class="c007">Exploring room after room, he realized slowly that he
was stripping off history in successive layers. The first had
been the booby-trapped road, lackadaisically planned to
ensure that mere inquisitiveness would be discouraged.
There had been no real denial of access, for there was almost
no possibility that anybody would care to visit the
place.</p>

<p class="c007">Next, the seal and the mantraps. An earlier period.
Somebody had once said: “This episode is closed. This
history is determined. We have all reached agreement. Only
a dangerous or frivolous meddler would seek to rake over
these dead ashes.”</p>

<p class="c007">And then, prying into the museum, Ross found the era
during which agreement had been reached, during which it
still was necessary to insist and demonstrate and cajole.</p>

<p class="c007">The outer rooms and open shelves were testimonials to
Jones. There were books of Jonesology—ingenious, persuasive
books divided usually into three sections. Human
Jonesology would be a painstaking effort to determine the
exact physical and mental tolerances of a Jones. Anatomical
atlases minutely gave femur lengths, cranial angles, eye
color to an angstrom, hair thickness to a micron. Moral
Jonesology treated of the dangers of deviating from these
physical and more elastic mental specifications. (Here the
formula appeared again, repeatedly invoked but never explained.
Already it was a truism.) And Sacred Jonesology
was a series of assertions concerning the nature of The
Jones in whose image all other Joneses were created.</p>

<p class="c007">Subdivisions of the open shelves held works on Geographical
Jonesology (the distribution across the planet of
Joneses) and similar works.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross went looking for a lower layer of history and found
it in a bale of crumbling pamphlets. “Comrades, We Must
Now Proceed to Consolidate Our Victory”; “Ultra-Jonesism,
An Infantile Political Disorder”; “On The Fallacy of
‘Jonesism In One Country’.” These Ross devoured. They
added up to the tale of a savage political battle among the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>victors of a greater war. Clemency was advocated and
condemned; extermination of the opposition was casually
mentioned; the Cultural Faction and the Biological Faction
had obviously been long locked in a death struggle. Across
the face of each pamphlet stood a similar logotype: the
formula. It was enigmatically mentioned in one pamphlet,
which almost incomprehensibly advanced the claims of
the Biological faction to supremacy among the Joneses
United: “Let us never forget, comrades, that the initiation
of the great struggle was not caused by our will or by the
will of our sincere and valiant opponents, the Culturists.
The inexorable law of nature, L<sub>T</sub>=L<sub>O</sub>e-<sup>T/2N</sup>, was the begetter
of that holocaust from which our planet has emerged
purified——”</p>

<p class="c007">Was it now?</p>

<p class="c007">The entrance to a musty, airless wing had once been
bricked up. The mortar was crumbling and a few bricks
had fallen. Above the arched doorway a sign said Military
Archives. On the floor was a fallen metal plaque whose
inscription said simply Dead Storage. He kicked the loose
bricks down and stepped through.</p>

<p class="c007">That was it. The place was lightless, except for the daylight
filtering through the violated archway. Ross hauled
maps and orders and period newspapers and military histories
and handbooks into the corridor in armfuls and
spread them on the floor. It took only minutes for him to
realize that he had his answer. He ran into the street and
shouted for the doctor.</p>

<p class="c007">Together they pored over the papers, occasionally reading
aloud choice bits, wonderingly.</p>

<p class="c007">The simplest statement of the problem they found was
in the paper-backed “Why We Fight” pamphlet issued for
the enlisted men of the Provisional North Continent Government
Army.</p>

<p class="c007">“What is a Jones?” the pamphlet asked rhetorically. “A
Jones is just a human being, the same as you and I. Dismiss
rumors that a Jones is supernatural or unkillable with
a laugh when you hear them. They arose because of the
extraordinary resemblance of one Jones to another. Putting
a bullet through one Jones in a skirmish and seeing another
<span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span>one rise up and come at you with a bayonet is a chilling
experience; in the confusion of battle it may seem that the
dead Jones rose and attacked. But this is not the case.
Never let the rumor pass unchallenged, and never fail to
report habitual rumor-mongers.</p>

<p class="c007">“How did the Joneses get that way? Many of you were
too young when this long war began to be aware of the
facts. Since then, wartime disruption of education and
normal communications facilities has left you in the dark.
This is the authoritative statement in simple language that
explains why we fight.</p>

<p class="c007">“This planet was colonized, presumably from the quasi-legendary
planet Earth. (The famous Earth Archives
Building, incidentally, is supposed to derive its puzzling
name from this fact.) It is presumed that the number of
colonists was originally small, probably in the hundreds.
Though the number of human beings on the planet increased
enormously as the generations passed, genetically
the population remained small. The same ones (heredity
units) were combined and reshuffled in varying combinations,
but no new ones were added. Now, it is a law of genetics
that in small populations, variations tend to smooth
out and every member of the population tends to become
like every other member. So-called unfixed genes are lost
as the generations pass; the end product of this process
would theoretically be a population in which every member
had exactly the same genes as every other member. This is
a practical impossibility, but the Joneses whom we fight
are a tragic demonstration of the fact that the process need
not be pushed to its ultimate extreme to dislocate the life
of a planet and cause endless misery to its dwellers.</p>

<p class="c007">“From our very earliest records there have been Joneses.
It is theorized that this gangling redheaded type was well
represented aboard the original colonizing ship, but some
experts believe one Jones type and the workings of chance
would be sufficient to produce the unhappy situation of
type-dominance.</p>

<p class="c007">“Some twenty-five years ago Joneses were everywhere
among us and not, as now, withdrawn to South Continent
and organized into a ruthless aggressor nation. They made
<span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span>up about thirty per cent of the population and had become
a closely knit organization devoted to mutual help. They
held the balance of political power in every election from
the municipal to the planetary level and virtually monopolized
production and finance. There were fanatics and
rabble-rousers among them who readily exploited a rising
tide of discontent over a series of curbing laws, finally
pushed through by a planetary majority, united at last in
self-defense against the rapacity and ruthless self-interest
of the Joneses.</p>

<p class="c007">“The Joneses withdrew en masse to South Continent.
Some sincerely wished them well; others scoffed at the secession
as a sulky and childish gesture. Only a handful of
citizens guessed the terrible truth, and were laughed at for
their pains. Five years after their withdrawal the Joneses
returned across the Vandemeer Peninsula and the war had
begun.</p>

<p class="c007">“A final word. There has been much loose talk among
the troops about the slogan of the Joneses, which goes
L<sub>T</sub>=L<sub>O</sub>e-<sup>T/2N</sup>. Some uninformed people actually believe
it is an invocation which gives the Joneses supernatural
power and invulnerability. It is not. It is merely an ancient
and well-known formula in genetics which quantitatively
describes the loss of unfixed genes from a population. By
mouthing this formula, the Joneses are simply expressing
in a compact way their ruthless determination that all
genes except theirs shall disappear from the planet and the
Joneses alone survive. In the formula L<sub>T</sub> means the number
of genes after the lapse of T years, L<sub>O</sub> means the original
number of genes, e means the base of the natural system of
logarithms and N means number of generations.”</p>

<p class="c007">The surgeon said slowly and with wonder: “So <i>that</i> was
my God!” He stretched out his hands before him. The
fingers were rock-steady.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross left him and paced the corridor uneasily. Fine.
Now he knew. Lost genes in genetically small populations.
On Halsey’s Planet, some fertility gene, no doubt. On Azor,
a male-sex-linked gene that provides men with the backbone
required to come out ahead in the incessant war of
the genders? Bernie was a gutless character. Here, all too
<span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span>many genes determining somatotype. On the planets that
had dropped out of communication, who knew? Scientific-thought
genes? Sex-drive-determining genes?</p>

<p class="c007">One thing was clear: any gene-loss was bad for the survival
of a planetary colony. Evolution had——on Earth——worked
out in a billion trial-and-error years a working
mechanism, man. Man exhibited a vast range of variation,
which was why he survived almost any conceivable catastrophe.</p>

<p class="c007">Reduce man to a single type and he is certain to succumb,
sooner or later, to the inevitable disaster that his
one type cannot cope with.</p>

<p class="c007">The problem, now stated clearly, was bigger than he had
dreamed. And now he knew only the problem—not the
solution.</p>

<p class="c007">Go to Earth.</p>

<p class="c007">Well, he had tried. There had been no flaw in his calculations,
no failure in setting up the Wesley panel. Yet—this
was Jones, not Earth; the city was only a city, not the planet
that the star charts logged. And the planet, beyond all
other considerations, was less like Earth than any conceivable
chart error could account for. Gravitation, wrong;
atmosphere, wrong; flora and fauna, wrong.</p>

<p class="c007">So. Eliminate the impossible, and what remains, however
unlikely, is true. So there had been a flaw in his calculations.
And the way to check that, once and for all, was
to get back to the starship.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross wheeled and went back into the book room. “Doc,”
he called, “how do we get out of here?”</p>

<p class="c007">The answer was: on their bellies. They trudged through
the forest for hours, skirting the road, hiding whenever a
suspicious noise gave warning that someone might be in
the vicinity. The Peepeece knew they were in the woods;
there was no doubt of that. And as soon as they got past
the tabu area, they had to crawl.</p>

<p class="c007">It was well past dark before Ross and the doctor,
scratched and aching, got to the tiny hamlet of Jonesie-on-the-Pike.
By the light from the one window in the village
that gave any signs of life, the doctor took a single horrified
look at Ross and shuddered. “You wait here,” he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span>ordered. “Hide under a bush or something—your beard
rubbed off.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross watched the doctor rap on the door and be admitted.
He couldn’t hear the conversation that followed,
but he saw the doctor’s hand go to his pocket, then clasp
the hand of the figure in the doorway. That was the language
all the galaxy understood, Ross realized; he only
hoped that the householder was an honest man—i. e., one
who would stay bribed, instead of informing the Peepeece
on them. It was beyond doubt that their descriptions had
long since been broadcast; the road must have been lined
with TV scanners on the way in.</p>

<p class="c007">The door opened again, and the doctor walked briskly
out. He strode out into the street, walked half a dozen paces
down the road, and waited for Ross to catch up with him.
“Okay,” the doctor whispered. “They’ll pick us up in half
an hour, down the road about a quarter of a mile. Let’s go.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What about the man you were talking to?” Ross asked.
“Won’t he turn us in?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor chuckled. “I gave him a drink of Jones’s
Juice out of my private stock,” he said. “No, he won’t turn
anybody in, at least not until he wakes up.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross nodded invisibly in the dark. He had a thought,
and suppressed it. But it wouldn’t stay down. Cautiously
he let it seep through his subconscious again, and looked it
over from every angle.</p>

<p class="c007">No, there wasn’t any doubt of it. Things were definitely
looking up!</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">Ben Jones roared, “Just what the hell do you think
you’re doing, Doc?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor pushed Ross through the doorway and turned
to face the other Jones. He asked mildly, “What?”</p>

<p class="c007">“You heard me!” Ben Jones blustered. “I let you out
with this one, and maybe I made a mistake at that. But I
by-Jones don’t intend to let you get out of here with all
three of them. What are you trying to get away with anyhow?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor didn’t change his mild expression. He took a
short, unhurried step forward. <i>Smack.</i></p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span>Ben Jones reeled back from the slap, his mouth open,
hand to his face. “Hey!” he squawked.</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor said levelly, “I’m telling you this just one
time, Ben. <i>Don’t cross me.</i> You’ve got the guns, but I’ve
got these.” He held up his spread hands. “You can shoot
me, I won’t deny that. But you can’t make me do your
dirty work for you. From now on things go my way—with
these three people, with my own life, with the bootleg
plastic surgery we do to keep you in armored cars. Or else
there won’t <i>be</i> any plastic surgery.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ben Jones swallowed, and Ross could see the man fighting
himself. He said after a moment, “No reason to act
sore, Doc. Haven’t we always got along? The only thing
is, maybe you don’t realize how dangerous these three——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shut up,” said the doctor. “Right, boys?”</p>

<p class="c007">The other two Joneses in the room shuffled and looked
uncomfortable. One of them said, “Don’t get mad, Ben,
but it kind of looks as if he’s right. We and the doc had a
little talk before you got here. It figures, you have to admit
it. He does the work; we ought to let him have something
to say about it.”</p>

<p class="c007">The look that Ben Jones gave him was pure poison, but
the man stood up to it, and in a minute Ben Jones looked
away. “Sure,” he said distantly. “You go right ahead, Doc.
We’ll talk this over again later on, when we’ve all had a
chance to cool off.”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor nodded coldly and followed Ross out. Helena
and Bernie, suitably Jonesified for the occasion, were already
in the car; Ross and the doctor jumped in with them,
and they drove away. Now that the strain was relaxed a bit
the doctor was panting, but there was a grin on his lips.
“Son-of-a-Jones,” he said happily, “I’ve been waiting five
years for this day!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross asked, “Is it all right? They won’t chase after us?”</p>

<p class="c007">“No, not Ben Jones. He has his own way of handling
things. Now if we were stupid enough to go back there, after
he had a chance to talk to the others without me around,
that would be something different. But we aren’t going
back.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s eyes widened. “Not even you, Doc?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span>“Especially not me.” The doctor concentrated on his
driving. Presently: “If I take you to the rendezvous, can
you find your ship from there?” he asked.</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure,” said Ross confidently. “And Doc—welcome to
our party.”</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">Space had never looked better.</p>

<p class="c007">They hung half a million miles off Jones, and Ross
fumbled irritatedly with the Wesley panel while the other
three stood around and made helpful suggestions. He set
up the integrals for Earth just as he had set them up once
before; the plot came out the same. He transferred the
computations to the controls and checked it against the
record in the log. The same. The ship should have gone
straight as a five-dimensional geodesic arrow to the planet
Earth.</p>

<p class="c007">Instead, he found by cross-checking the star atlas, it had
gone in almost the other direction entirely, to the planet
of Jones.</p>

<p class="c007">He threw his pencil across the room and swore. “I don’t
get it,” he complained.</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s probably broken, Ross,” Helena told him seriously.
“You know how machines are. They’re <i>always</i> doing something
funny just when you least expect it.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross bit down hard on his answer to that. Bernie contributed
his morsel, and even Dr. Sam Jones, whose race
had lost even the memory of spaceflight, had a suggestion.
Ross swore at them all, then took time to swear at the
board, at the starship, at Haarland, at Wesley, and most of
all at himself.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena turned her back pointedly. She said to Bernie,
“The way Ross acts sometimes you’d honestly think he was
the <i>only</i> one who’d <i>ever</i> run this thing. Why, my goodness,
I <i>know</i> you can’t <i>rely</i> on that silly board! Didn’t I have just
exactly the same experience with it myself?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gritted his teeth and doggedly started all over again
with the computations for Earth. Then he did a slow double-take.</p>

<p class="c007">“Helena,” he whispered. “What experience did you
have?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span>“Why, just the same as now! Don’t you <i>remember</i>,
Ross? When you and Bernie were in jail and I had to come
rescue you?”</p>

<p class="c007">“What happened?” Ross shouted.</p>

<p class="c007">“My goodness, Ross don’t <i>yell</i> at me! There was that
silly light flashing all the time. It was driving me out of my
<i>mind</i>. Well, I knew <i>perfectly</i> well that I wasn’t going to get
anywhere if it was going to act like <i>that</i>, so I just——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross, eyes glazed, robotlike, lifted the cover off the main
Wesley unit. Down at the socket of the alarm signal, shorting
out two delicately machined helices that were a basic
part of the Wesley drive, wedged between an eccentric
vernier screw and a curious crystalline lattice, was—the
hairpin.</p>

<p class="c007">He picked it out and stared at it unbelievingly. He marveled,
“It says in the manual, ‘On no account should any
alterations be made in any part of the Wesley driving assembly
by any technician under a C-Twelve rating.’ She
didn’t like the alarm going off. So she fixed it. With a hairpin.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena giggled and appealed to Bernie. “Doesn’t he <i>kill</i>
you?” she asked.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s eyes were glazed and his hands worked convulsively.
“Kill,” he muttered, advancing on Helena. “Kill, kill,
kill——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Help!” she screamed.</p>

<p class="c007">The two men managed to subdue Ross with the aid of a
needle from Dr. Jones’s kit-pocket.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was in tears and tried to explain to the others:
“Just for no reason at <i>all</i>——”</p>

<p class="c007">She got only icy stares. After a while she sulkily began
setting up the Wesley board for the Earth jump.</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 12"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 12</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">ROSS awoke, clearheaded and alert.
Helena and Bernie were looking at him apprehensively.</p>

<p class="c007">He understood and said grudgingly, “Sorry I flipped. I
didn’t mean to scare you. Everything seemed to go
black——”</p>

<p class="c007">They smothered him with relieved protestations that
they understood perfectly and Helena wouldn’t stick hairpins
into the Wesley Drive ever again. Even if the ship
hadn’t blown up. Even if she had rescued the men from
“Minerva.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Anyway,” she said happily, “we’re off Earth. At least,
it’s <i>supposed</i> to be Earth, according to the charts.”</p>

<p class="c007">He unkinked himself and studied the planet through a
vision screen at its highest magnification. The apparent
distance was one mile; nothing was hidden from him.</p>

<p class="c007">“Golly,” he said, impressed. “Science! Makes you realize
what backward gropers we were.”</p>

<p class="c007">Obviously they had it, down there on the pleasant, cloud-flecked,
green and blue planet. Science! White, towering
cities whose spires were laced by flying bridges—and inexplicably
decorated with something that looked like cooling
fins. Huge superstreamlined vehicles lazily coursing the
roads and skies. Long, linked-pontoon cities slowly heaving
on the breasts of the oceans. Science!</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span>Ross said reverently, “We’re here. Flarney was right.
Helena, Bernie, Doc—maybe this is the parent planet of
us all and maybe it isn’t. But the people who built those
cities <i>must</i> know all the answers. Helena, will you please
land us?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, Ross. Shall I look for a spaceport?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross frowned. “Of course. Do you think <i>these</i> people
are savages? We’ll go in openly and take our problem to
them. Besides, imagine the radar setup they must have!
We’d never sneak through even if we wanted to.”</p>

<p class="c007">Helena casually fingered the controls; there was the
sickening swoop characteristic of her ship-handling, several
times repeated. As she jerked them wildly across the
planet’s orbit she explained over her shoulder, “I had the
darnedest time finding a really big spaceport on that little
radar thing—oops!—but there’s a nice-looking one near
that coastal city. Whee! That was close! There was one—sorry,
Ross—on a big lake inland, but I didn’t like——Now
everybody be very quiet. This is the hard part and I
have to concentrate.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross hung on.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena landed the ship with her usual timber-shivering
crash. “Now,” she said briskly, “we’d better allow a little
time for it to cool down. This <i>is</i> nice, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross dragged himself, bruised, from the floor. He had to
agree. It was nice. The landing field, rimmed by gracious,
light buildings (with the cooling fins), was dotted with
great, silvery ships. They didn’t, Ross thought with a twinge
of irritation, seem to be space vessels, though; leave it to
Helena to get them down at some local airport! Still—the
ships also, he noticed, were liberally studded with the fins.
He peered at them with puzzlement and a rising sense of
excitement. Certainly they had a function, and that function
could only be some sort of energy receptor. Could it
be—dared he imagine that it was the long-dreamed-of
cosmic energy tap? What a bonus that would be to bring
back with him! And what other marvels might this polished
technology have to give them....</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie distracted him. He said, “Hey, Ross. Here comes
somebody.”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span>But even Bernie’s tone was awed. A magnificent vehicle
was crawling toward them across the field. It was long,
low, bullet-shaped—and with cooling fins. Multiple plates
of silvery metal contrasted with a glossy black finish. All
about its periphery was a lacy pattern of intricate crumples
and crinkles of metal, as though its skirts had been crushed
and rumpled. Ross sighed and marveled: What a production
problem these people had solved, stamping those forms
out between dies.</p>

<p class="c007">Then he saw the faces of the passengers.</p>

<p class="c007">He drew in his breath sharply. Godlike. Two men whose
brows were cliffs of alabaster, whose chins were strong
with the firmness of steady, flamelike wisdom. Two women
whose calm, lovely features made the heart within him
melt and course.</p>

<p class="c007">The vehicle stopped ten yards from the open spacelock
of the ship. From its tip gushed upward a ten-foot fountain
of sparks that flashed the gamut of the rainbow. Simultaneously
one of the godlike passengers touched the wheel, and
there was a sweet, piercing, imperative summons like a
hundred strings and brasses in unison.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena whispered, “They want us to come out. Ross—Ross—I
can’t face <i>them</i>!” She buried her face in her hands.</p>

<p class="c007">“Steady,” he said gravely. “They’re only human.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross gripped that belief tightly; he hardly dared permit
himself to think, even for a second, that perhaps these
people were no longer merely human. Hoarsely he said,
“We need their help. Maybe we should send Doc Jones
out first. He’s the oldest of us, and he’s the only one you
could call a scientist; he can talk to them. Where is he?”</p>

<p class="c007">A raucous Jones voice bellowed through the domed control
room: “Who wansh ol’ doc, hargh? Who wansh goo’
ol’ doc?”</p>

<p class="c007">Good old doc staggered into the room, obviously loaded
to the gills by a very enjoyable backslide. He began to
sing:</p>

<p class="c009">“In A. J. seven thirty-two a Jones from Jones’s Valley,
He wandered into Jones’s Town to hold a Jonesist
Rally. He shocked the gents and ladies both; his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>talk was most disturbing; He spoke of seven-sided
doors and purple-colored curbing——”</p>

<p class="c007">Jones’s eyes focused on Helena. He flushed. “’m deeply
sorry,” he mumbled. “Unf’rgivable vulgararrity. Mom’ntarily
f’rgot ladies were present.”</p>

<p class="c007">Again that sweet summons sounded.</p>

<p class="c007">“Pull yourself together, doctor,” Ross begged. “This is
Earth. The people seem—very advanced. Don’t disgrace
us. Please!”</p>

<p class="c007">Jones’s face went pale and perspiration broke out.
“’Scuse me,” he mumbled, and staggered out again.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross closed the door on him and said, “We’ll leave him.
He’ll be all right; nothing’s going to happen here.” He took
a deep breath. “We’ll all go out,” he said.</p>

<p class="c007">Unconsciously Ross and Helena drew closer together
and joined hands. They walked together down the unfolding
ramp and approached the vehicle.</p>

<p class="c007">One of the coolly lovely women scrutinized them and
turned to the man beside her. She remarked melodiously,
“Yuhsehtheybebems!”, and laughed a silvery tinkle.</p>

<p class="c007">Panic gripped Ross for a long moment. A thing he had
never considered, but a thing which he should have realized
would be inevitable. Of course! These folk—older and incomparably
more advanced than the rest of the peoples
in the universe—would have evolved out of the common
language into a speech of their own, deliberately or naturally
rebuilt to handle the speed, subtlety, and power of
their thoughts.</p>

<p class="c007">But perhaps the older speech was merely disused and not
lost.</p>

<p class="c007">He said formally, quaking: “People of Earth, we are
strangers from another star. We throw ourselves on your
mercy and ask for your generosity. Our problem is summed
up in the genetic law L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the
minus T-over-two-N. Of course——”</p>

<p class="c007">One of the men was laughing. Ross broke off.</p>

<p class="c007">The man smiled: “Wha’s that again?”</p>

<p class="c007">They understood! He repeated the formula, slowly, and
would have explained further, but the man cut him off.</p>

<p class="c007">“Math,” the man smiled. “We don’ use that stuff no
<span class="pageno" id="Page_140">140</span>more. I got a lab assistant, maybe he uses it sometimes.”</p>

<p class="c007">They were beyond mathematics! They had broken
through into some mode of symbolic reasoning that must
be as far beyond mathematics as math was beyond primitive
languages!</p>

<p class="c007">“Sir,” he said eagerly, “you must be a scientist. May I
ask you to——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Get in,” he smiled. Gigantic doors unfolded from the
vehicle. Thought-reading? Had the problem been snatched
from his brain even before he stated it? Mutely he gestured
at Helena and Bernie. Jones would be all right where he
was for several hours if Ross was any judge of blackouts.
And you don’t quibble with demigods.</p>

<p class="c007">The man, the scientist, did something to a glittering
control panel that was, literally, more complex than the
Wesley board back on the starship. Noise filled the vehicle—noise
that Ross identified as music for a moment. It
was a starkly simple music whose skeleton was three
thumps and a crash, three thumps and a crash. Then followed
an antiphonal chant—a clear tenor demanding in a
monotone: “Is this your car?” and a tremendous chorally-shouted:
“NO!”</p>

<p class="c007">Too deep for him, Ross thought forlornly as the car
swerved around and sped off. His eyes wandered over the
control board and fixed on the largest of its dials, where a
needle crawled around from a large forty to a large fifty
and a red sixty, proportional to the velocity of the vehicle.
Unable to concentrate because of the puzzling music, unable
to converse, he wondered what the units of time and
space were that gave readings of fifty and sixty for their
very low rate of speed—hardly more than a brisk walk,
when you noticed the slow passage of objects outside. But
there seemed to be a whistle of wind that suggested high
speed—perhaps an effect peculiar to the cooling-fin power
system, however it worked. He tried to shout a question
at the driver, but it didn’t get through. The driver smiled,
patted his arm and returned to his driving.</p>

<p class="c007">They nosed past a building—cooling fins—and Ross
almost screamed when he saw what was on the other
side: a curve of highway jammed solid with vehicles that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_141">141</span>were traveling at blinding speed. And the driver wasn’t
stopping.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross closed his eyes and jammed his feet against the
floorboards waiting for the crash which, somehow, didn’t
come. When he opened his eyes they were in the traffic
and the needle on the speedometer quivered at 275. He
blew a great breath and thought admiringly: reflexes to
match their superb intellects, of course. There <i>couldn’t</i> have
been a crash.</p>

<p class="c007">Just then, across the safety island in the opposing lane,
there was a crash.</p>

<p class="c007">The very brief flash of vision Ross was allowed told him,
incredibly, that a vehicle had attempted to enter the lane
going the wrong way, with the consequences you’d expect.
He watched, goggle-eyed, as the effects of the crash rippled
down the line of oncoming traffic. The squeal of brakes
and rending of metal was audible even above the thumping
music: “Is this your car?” “NO!”</p>

<p class="c007">Thereafter, as they drove, the opposing lane was motionless,
but not silent. The piercing blasts of strings and trumpets
rose to the heavens from each vehicle, as did the brilliant
pyrotechnic jets. A call for help, Ross theorized. The
music was beginning to make his head ache. It had been
going on for at least ten minutes. Suddenly, blessedly, it
changed. There was a great fanfare of trombones in major
thirds that seemed to go on forever, but didn’t quite. At the
end of forever, the same tenor chanted: “You got a Roadmeister?”
and the chorus roared: “<i>YES!</i>”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross realized forlornly that the music must contain
values and subtleties which his coarser senses and undeveloped
esthetic background could not grasp. But he wished
it would stop. It was making him miss all the scenery.
After perhaps the fifteenth repetition of the Roadmeister
motif, it ended; the driver, with a look of deep satisfaction,
did something to the control board that turned off a
subsequent voice before it could get out more than a
syllable.</p>

<p class="c007">He turned to Ross and yelled above the suddenly-noticeable
rush of air, “Talk-talk-talk,” and gave a whimsical
shrug.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_142">142</span>During the moment his attention wandered from the
road, his vehicle rammed the one ahead, decelerated
sharply and was rammed by the one behind, accelerated
and rammed the one ahead again and then fell back into
place.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross suddenly realized that he knew what had caused
those crumples and crinkles around the periphery of the
car.</p>

<p class="c007">“Subtle,” the driver yelled. “Indirection. Sneak it in.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What?” Ross screamed.</p>

<p class="c007">“The commersh,” the driver yelled.</p>

<p class="c007">It meant nothing to Ross, and he felt miserable because
it meant nothing. He studied the roadside unhappily and
almost beamed when he saw a sign coming up. Not advertising,
of course, he thought. Perhaps some austere reminder
of a whole man’s duty to the race and himself, some
noble phrase that summed up the wisdom of a great thinker....</p>

<p class="c007">But the sign—and it had cooling fins—declared:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">BE SMUG! SMOKE SMOGS!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">And the next one urged:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">BEAT YOUR SISTER</div>
      <div class="line">CHEAT YOUR BROTHER</div>
      <div class="line">BUT SEND SOME SMOGS</div>
      <div class="line">TO DEAR OLD MOTHER.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c010">It said it on four signs which, apparently alerted by radar,
zinged in succession along a roadside track even with the
vehicle.</p>

<p class="c007">There were more. And worse. They were coming to a
city.</p>

<p class="c007">Turmoil and magnificence! White pylons, natty belts of
green, lacy bridges, the roaring traffic, nimble-skipping
pedestrians waving at the cars and calling—greetings? It
sounded like “Suvvabih! Suvvabih! Bassa-bassa!” The
shops were packed and radiant, dazzling. Ross wondered
fleetingly how one parked here, and then found out. A car
pulled from the curb and a hundred cars converged on the
spot, shrilling their sweet message and spouting their gay
sparkles. Theirs too! There were a pair of jolting crashes
<span class="pageno" id="Page_143">143</span>as it shouldered two other vehicles aside and parked, two
wheels over the curb and on the sidewalk.</p>

<p class="c007">“Suvvabih-bassa!” shouted drivers, and the man beside
Ross gaily repeated the cry. The vehicle’s doors opened
and they climbed out into the quick tempo of the street.</p>

<p class="c007">It was loud with a melodious babble from speaker horns
visible everywhere. The driver yelled cheerfully at Ross:
“C’mon. Party.” He followed, dazed and baffled, assailed
by sudden doubts and contradictions.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">It was a party, all right—twenty floors up a shimmering
building in a large, handsome room whose principal decorative
motif seemed to be cooling fins.</p>

<p class="c007">Perhaps twenty couples were assembled; they turned and
applauded as they made their appearance.</p>

<p class="c007">The vehicle driver, standing grandly at the head of a
short flight of stairs leading to the room, proclaimed: “I got
these rocket flyers like on the piece of paper you guys read
me. Right off the field. Twenny points. How about that?”</p>

<p class="c007">A tall, graying man with a noble profile hurried up and
beamed: “Good show, Joe. I knew we could count on you
to try for the high-point combo. You was always a real
sport. You got the fish?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure we got the fish.” Joe turned and said to one of the
lovely ladies, “Elna, show him the fish.”</p>

<p class="c007">She unwrapped a ten-pound swordfish and proudly held
it up while Ross, Bernie, and Helena stared wildly.</p>

<p class="c007">The profile took the fish and poked it. “Real enough,
Joe. You done great. Now if the rocket flyers here are okay
you’re okay. Then you got twenny points and the prize.</p>

<p class="c007">“You’re a rocket flyer, ain’t you, Buster?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross realized he was being addressed. He croaked:
“Men of Earth, we come from a far-distant star in search
of——”</p>

<p class="c007">The profile said, “Just a minute, Buster. <i>Just</i> a minute.
You ain’t from Earth?”</p>

<p class="c007">“We come from a far-distant star in search of——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Stick to the point, Buster. You ain’t a rocket flyer from
Earth? None of you?”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_144">144</span>“No,” Ross said. He furtively pinched himself. It hurt.
Therefore he must be awake. Or crazy.</p>

<p class="c007">The profile was sorrowfully addressing a downcast Joe.
“You should of asked them, Joe. You really should of. Now
you don’t even get the three points for the swordfish, because
you went an’ tried for the combo. It reely is a pity.
Din’t you ask them at all?”</p>

<p class="c007">Joe blustered, “He did say sump’m, but I figured a rocket
flyer was a rocket flyer, and they come out of a rocket.” His
lower lip was trembling. Both of the ladies of his party
were crying openly. “We tried,” Joe said, and began to
blubber. Ross moved away from him in horrified disgust.</p>

<p class="c007">The profile shook its head, turned and announced: “Owing
to a unfortunate mistake, the search group of Dr.
Joseph Mulcahy, Sc.D., Ph.D., got disqualified for the combination.
They on’y got three points. So that’s all the groups
in an’ who got the highest?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I got fifteen! I got fifteen!” screamed a gorgeous brunette
in a transport of joy. “A manhole cover from the
museum an’ a las’ month <i>Lipreaders Digest</i> an’ a steering
wheel from a police car! I got fifteen!”</p>

<p class="c007">The others clustered about her, chattering. Ross said to
the profile mechanically: “Man of Earth, we come from a
far-distant star in search of——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure, Buster,” said the profile. “Sure. Too bad. But you
should of told Joe. You don’t have to go. You an’ your
friends have a drink. Mix. Have fun. I gotta go give the
prize now.” He hurried off.</p>

<p class="c007">A passing blonde, stacked, said to Ross: “Hel-looo,
baldy. Wanna see my operation?” He began to shake his
head and felt Helena’s fingers close like steel on his arm.
The blonde sniffed and passed on.</p>

<p class="c007">“I’ll operate her,” Helena said, and then: “Ross, what’s
<i>wrong</i> with everybody? They act so young, even the old
people!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Follow me,” he said, and began to circulate through the
party, trailing Bernie and a frankly terrified Helena, button-holing
and confronting and demanding and cajoling. Nothing
worked. He was greeted with amused tolerance and
invited to have a drink and asked what he thought of the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_145">145</span>latest commersh with its tepid trumpets. Nobody gave a
damn that he was from a far-distant star except Joe, who
sullenly watched them wander and finally swaggered up to
Ross.</p>

<p class="c007">“I figured something out,” he said grimly. “You made
me lose.” He brought up a roundhouse right, and Ross saw
the stars and heard the birdies.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">Bernie and Helena brought him to on the street. He
found he had been walking for some five minutes with a
blanked-out mind. They told him he had been saying over
and over again, “Men of Earth, I come from a far-distant
star.” It had got them ejected from the party.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was crying with anger and frustration; she had
also got a nasty scare when one of the vehicles had swerved
up onto the sidewalk and almost crushed the three of them
against the building wall.</p>

<p class="c007">“And,” she wailed, “I’m hungry and we don’t know
where the ship is and I’ve got to sit down and—and go
someplace.”</p>

<p class="c007">“So do I,” Bernie said weakly.</p>

<p class="c007">So did Ross. He said, “Let’s just go into this restaurant.
I know we have no money—don’t nag me please, Helena.
We’ll order, eat, not pay, and get arrested.” He held up
his hand at the protests. “I said, get arrested. The smartest
thing we could do. Obviously somebody’s running this
place—and it’s not the stoops we’ve seen. The quickest
way I know of to get to whoever’s in charge is to get in
trouble. And once they see us we can explain everything.”</p>

<p class="c007">It made sense to them. Unfortunately the first restaurant
they tried was coin-operated—from the front door on. So
were the second to seventh. Ross tried to talk Bernie into
slugging a pedestrian so they could all be jugged for disturbing
the peace, but failed.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena noted at last that the women’s wear shops had
live attendants who, presumably, would object to trouble.
They marched into one of the gaudy places, each took a
dress from a rack and methodically tore them to pieces.</p>

<p class="c007">A saleslady approached them dithering and asked
<span class="pageno" id="Page_146">146</span>tremulously: “What for did you do that? Din’t you like the
dresses?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Well yes, very much,” Helena began apologetically.
“But you see, the fact is——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Shuddup!” Ross told her. He said to the saleslady:
“No. We hated them. We hate every dress here. We’re going
to tear up every dress in the place. Why don’t you call
the police?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh,” she said vaguely. “All right,” and vanished into
the rear of the store. She returned after a minute and said,
“He wants to know your names.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Just say ‘three desperate strangers,’” Ross told her.</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh. Thank you.” She vanished again.</p>

<p class="c007">The police arrived in five minutes or so. An excited elder
man with many stripes on his arms strode up to them excitedly
as they stood among the shredded ruins of the
dresses. “Where’d they go?” he demanded. “Didja see what
they looked like?”</p>

<p class="c007">“We’re them. We three. We tore these dresses up. You’d
better take them along for evidence.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Oh,” the cop said. “Okay. Go on into the wagon. And
no funny business, hear me?”</p>

<p class="c007">They offered no funny business. In the wagon Ross expounded
on his theme that there must be directing intelligences
and that they must be at the top. Helena was horribly
depressed because she had never been arrested before
and Bernie was almost jaunty. Something about him suggested
that he felt at home in a patrol wagon.</p>

<p class="c007">It stopped and the elderly stripe-wearer opened the door
for them. Ross looked on the busy street for anything resembling
a station house and found none.</p>

<p class="c007">The cop said, “Okay, you people. Get going. An’ let’s
don’t have no trouble or I’ll run you in.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross yelled in outrage, “This is a frame-up! You have
no right to turn us loose. We demand to be arrested and
tried!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Wise guy,” sneered the cop, climbed into the wagon
and drove off.</p>

<p class="c007">They stood forlornly as the crowd eddied and swirled
around them. “There was a plate of sandwiches at that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_147">147</span>party,” Helena recalled wistfully. “And a ladies’ room.”
She began to cry. “If only you hadn’t acted so darn superior,
Ross! I’ll bet they would have let us have all the sandwiches
we wanted.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie said unexpectedly, “She’s right. Watch me.”</p>

<p class="c007">He buttonholed a pedestrian and said, “Duh.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah?” asked the pedestrian with kindly interest.</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie concentrated and said, “Duh. I yam losted. I yam
broke. I losted all my money. Gimme some money, mister,
please?”</p>

<p class="c007">The pedestrian beamed and said, “That is real tough
luck, buddy. If I give you some money will you send it to
me when you get some more? Here is my name wrote on a
card.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie said, “Sure, mister. I will send the money to you.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Then,” said the pedestrian, “I will give you some money
because you will send it back to me. Good luck, buddy.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie, with quiet pride, showed them a piece of paper
that bore the interesting legend Twenty Dollars.</p>

<p class="c007">“Let’s eat,” Ross said, awed.</p>

<p class="c007">A machine on a restaurant door changed the bill for a
surprising heap of coins and they swaggered in, making
beelines for the modest twin doors at the rear of the place.
Close up the doors were not very modest, but after the
initial shock Ross realized that there must be many on this
planet who could not read at all. The washroom attendant,
for instance, who collected the “dimes” and unlocked the
booths. “Dime” seemed to be his total vocabulary.</p>

<p class="c007">By comparison the machines in the restaurant proper
were intelligent. The three of them ate and ate and ate.
Only after coffee did they spare a thought for Dr. Sam
Jones, who should about then be awakening with a murderous
hangover aboard the starship.</p>

<p class="c007">Thinking about him did not mean they could think of
anything to do.</p>

<p class="c007">“He’s in trouble,” Bernie said. “<i>We’re</i> in trouble. First
things first.”</p>

<p class="c007">“What trouble?” asked Helena brightly. “You got twenty
dollars by asking for it and I suppose you can get plenty
more. And I think we wouldn’t have got thrown out of that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_148">148</span>party if—ah—<i>we</i> hadn’t gone swaggering around talking
as if we knew everything. Maybe these people here aren’t
very bright——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross snorted.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena went on doggedly, “——not <i>very</i> bright, but they
certainly can tell when somebody’s brighter than they are.
And naturally they don’t like it. Would you like it? It’s like
a really old person talking to a really young person about
nothing but age. But here when you’re bright you make
everybody feel bad every time you open your mouth.”</p>

<p class="c007">“So,” Ross said impatiently, “we can go on begging and
drifting. But that’s not what we’re here for. The answer is
supposed to be on Earth. Obviously none of the people
we’ve seen could possibly know anything about genetics.
Obviously they can’t keep this machine civilization going
without guidance. There must be people of normal intelligence
around. In the government, is my guess.”</p>

<p class="c007">“No,” said Helena, but she wouldn’t say why. She just
thought not.</p>

<p class="c007">The inconclusive debate ended with them on the street
again. Bernie, who seemed to enjoy it, begged a hundred
dollars. Ross, who didn’t, got eleven dollars in singles and
a few threats of violence for acting like a wise guy. Helena
got no money and three indecent proposals before Ross
indignantly took her out of circulation.</p>

<p class="c007">They found a completely automatic hotel at nightfall.
Ross tried to inspect Helena’s room for comfort and safety,
but was turned back at the threshold by a staggering jolt
of electricity. “Mechanical house dick,” he muttered, picking
himself up from the floor. “Well,” he said to her sourly,
“it’s safe. Good night.”</p>

<p class="c007">And later in the gents’ room, to Bernie: “You’d think
the damn-fool machine could be adjusted so that a person
with perfectly innocent intentions could visit a lady——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Sure,” said Bernie soothingly, “sure. Say, Ross, frankly,
is this Earth exactly what you expected it to be?”</p>

<p class="c007">The attendant moved creakily across the floor and said
hopefully, “Dime?”</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_149">149</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 13"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 13</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THEIR second day on the bum they accumulated
a great deal of change and crowded into a telephone
booth. The plan was to try to locate their starship
and find out what, if anything, could be done for Sam
Jones.</p>

<p class="c007">An automatic Central conferred with an automatic Information
and decided that they wanted the Captain of the
Port, Baltimore Rocket Field.</p>

<p class="c007">They got the Port Captain on the wire and Ross asked
after the starship. The captain asked, “Who wan’sta know,
huh?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross realized he had overdone it and shoved Bernie at
the phone. Bernie snorted and guggled and finally got out
that he jus’ wannit ta know. The captain warmed up immediately
and said oh, sure, the funny-lookin’ ship, it was
still there all right.</p>

<p class="c007">“How about the fella that’s in it?”</p>

<p class="c007">“You mean the funny-lookin’ fella? He went someplace.”</p>

<p class="c007">“He went someplace? What place?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Someplace. He went away, like. I din’t see him go,
mister. I got plenty to do without I should watch out for
every dummy that comes along.”</p>

<p class="c007">“T’anks,” said Bernie hopelessly at Ross’s signal.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_150">150</span>They walked the street, deep in thought. Helena sobbed,
“Let’s <i>leave</i> him here, Ross. I don’t like this place.”</p>

<p class="c007">“No.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie growled, “What’s the difference, Ross? He can
get a snootful just as easy here as anywhere else——”</p>

<p class="c007">“No! It isn’t the Doc, don’t you see? But this is the place
we’re looking for. All the answers we need are here; we’ve
got to get them.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie stepped around two tussling men on the ground,
ineffectually thumping each other over a chocolate-covered
confection. “Yeah,” he said shortly.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">Helena said: “Isn’t that a silly way to put up a big sign
like that?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked up. “My God,” he said. A gigantic metal
sign with the legend, <i>Buy Smogs</i>——<i>You Can SMOKE
Them</i>, was being hoisted across the street ahead. The street
was nominally closed to traffic by cheerfully inattentive
men with red flags; a mobile boom hoist was doing the
work, and quite obviously doing it wrong. The angle of
the boom arm with the vertical was far too great for stability;
the block-long sign was tipping the too-light body of
the hoisting engine on its treads....</p>

<p class="c007">Ross made a flash calculation: when the sign fell, as fall
it inevitably would, perhaps two hundred people who had
wandered uncaringly past the warning flags would be under
it.</p>

<p class="c007">There was a sudden aura of blue light around the engine
body.</p>

<p class="c007">It tipped back to stability. The boom angle decreased,
and the engine crawled forward to take up the horizontal
difference.</p>

<p class="c007">The blue light went out.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena choked and coughed and babbled, “But Ross, it
<i>couldn’t</i> have because——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross said: “It’s them!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Who?”</p>

<p class="c007">Excitedly: “The people behind all this! The people who
built the cities and put up the buildings and designed the
machines. The people who have the answers! Come on,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_151">151</span>Bernie. I just seem to antagonize these people—I want you
to ask the boom operator what happened.”</p>

<p class="c007">The boom operator cheerfully explained that nah, it was
just somep’n that happened. Nah, nobody did nothin’ to
make it happen. It was in case if anything went wrong, like.
You know?</p>

<p class="c007">They retired and regrouped their forces.</p>

<p class="c007">“Foolproof machines,” Ross said slowly. “And I mean
really <i>fool</i> proof. Friends, I was wrong, I admit it; I thought
that those buildings and cars were something super-special,
and they turned out to be just silly gimcracks. But not this
blue light thing. That boom <i>had</i> to fall.”</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie shrugged rebelliously. “So what? So they’ve got
some kinds of machines you don’t have on Halsey’s
Planet?”</p>

<p class="c007">“A different order of machines, Bernie! Believe me, that
blue light was something as far from any safety device I
ever heard of as the starships are from oxcarts. When we
find the people who designed them——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Suppose they’re all dead?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross winced. He said determinedly, “We’ll find them.”
They returned to their begging and were recognized
one day by the gray-haired profile of the party. He didn’t
remember just who they were or where they were from
or where he had met them, but he enthusiastically invited
them to yet another party. He told them he was
Hennery Matson, owner of an airline.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross asked about accidents and blue lights. Matson
jovially said some o’ his pilots talked about them things but
he din’t bother his head none. Ya get these planes from the
field, see, an’ they got all kinds of gadgets on them. Come
on to the party!</p>

<p class="c007">They went, because Hennery promised them another
guest—Sanford Eisner, who was a wealthy aircraft manufacturer.
But he din’t bother his head none either; them
rockets was hard to make, you had to feed the patterns,
like, into the master jigs just so, and, boy!, if you got ’em
in backwards it was a <i>mess</i>. Wheredja get the patterns?
Look, mister, we <i>always</i> had the patterns, an’ don’t spoil
the party, will ya?</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_152">152</span>The party was a smasher. They all woke with headaches
on Matson’s deep living room rug.</p>

<p class="c007">“You did fine, Ross,” Helena softly assured him. “Nobody
would have guessed you were any smarter than anybody
else here. There wasn’t a bit of trouble.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross seemed to have a hiatus in his memory.</p>

<p class="c007">The importance of the hiatus faded as time passed. There
was a general move toward the automatic dispensing bar. It
seemed to be regulated by a time clock; no matter what you
dialed first thing in the morning, it ruthlessly poured a double
rye with Worcestershire and tabasco and plopped a fair
imitation of a raw egg into the concoction. It helped!</p>

<p class="c007">Along about noon something clicked in the bar’s innards.
Guests long since surfeited with the prairie oysters joyously
dialed martinis and manhattans and the day’s serious drinking
began.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross fuzzily tried to trace the bar’s supply. There were
nickel pipes that led Heaven knew where. Some vast depot
of fermentation tanks and stills? Fed grain and cane by
crawling harvest-monsters? Grain and cane planted from
seed the harvest-monsters carefully culled from the crop
for the plow-and-drag-and-drill-and-fertilize-and-cultivate
monsters?</p>

<p class="c007">His head was beginning to ache again. A jovial martini-drinker
who had something to do with a bank—a <i>bank!</i>—roared,
“Hey, fellas! I got a idea what we can do! Less go
on over to <i>my</i> place!”</p>

<p class="c007">So they all went, and that disposed of another day.</p>

<hr class="c008" />

<p class="c007">It blended into a dream of irresponsible childhood.
When your clothes grew shabby you helped yourself to
something that fit from your host of the moment’s wardrobe.
When you grew tired of one host you switched to
another. They seldom remembered you from day to day,
and they never asked questions.</p>

<p class="c007">Their sex was uninhibited and most of the women were
more or less pregnant most of the time. They fought and
sulked and made up and giggled and drank and ate and
slept. All of the men had jobs, and all of them, once in a
while, would remember and stagger over to a phone and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_153">153</span>make a call to an automatic receptionist to find out if everything
was going all right with their jobs. It always was. They
loved their children and tolerated anything from them, except
shrewd inquisitiveness which drew a fast bust in the
teeth from the most indulgent daddy or adoring mommy.
They loved their friends and their guests, as long as they
weren’t wise guys, and tolerated anything from them—as
long as they weren’t wise guys.</p>

<p class="c007">Did it last a day, a week, a month?</p>

<p class="c007">Ross didn’t know. The only things that were really bothering
Ross were, first, nobody wouldn’t tell him nothin’
about the blue lights and, second, that Bernie, he was actin’
like a wise guy.</p>

<p class="c007">There came a morning when it ended as it had begun: on
somebody’s living room rug with a headache pounding
between his eyes. Helena was sobbing softly, and that wise
guy, Bernie, was tugging at him.</p>

<p class="c007">“Lea’ me alone,” ordered Captain Ross without opening
his eyes. Wouldn’t let a man get his rest. What did he have
to bring them along for, anyway? Should have left them
where he found them, not brought them to this place Earth
where they could act like a couple of wise guys and keep
getting in his way every time he came close to the blue-light
people, the intelligent people, the people with the answers
to——to——</p>

<p class="c007">He lay there, trying to remember what the question was.</p>

<p class="c007">“——<i>have</i> to get him out of here,” said Helena’s voice
with a touch of hysteria.</p>

<p class="c007">“——go back and get that fellow Haarland,” said Bernie’s
voice, equally tense. Ross contemplated the fragments
of conversation he had caught, ignoring what the two were
saying to him. Haarland, he thought fuzzily, <i>that</i> wise
guy....</p>

<p class="c007">Bernie had him on his feet. “Leggo,” ordered Ross, but
Bernie was tenacious. He stumbled along and found himself
in the men’s room of the apartment. The tired-looking
attendant appeared from nowhere and Bernie said something
to him. The attendant rummaged in his chest and
found something that Bernie put into a fizzy drink.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross sniffed at it suspiciously. “Wassit?” he asked.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_154">154</span>“Please, Ross, drink it. It’ll sober you up. We’ve got to
get out of here—we’re going nuts, Helena and me. This
has been going on for weeks!”</p>

<p class="c007">“Nope. Gotta find a blue light,” Ross said obstinately,
swaying.</p>

<p class="c007">“But you aren’t finding it, Ross. You aren’t doing anything
except get drunk and pass out and wake up and get
drunk. Come on, drink the drink.” Ross impatiently dashed
it to the floor. Bernie sighed. “All right, Ross,” he said
wearily. “Helena can run the ship; we’re taking off.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Go ’head.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Good-by, Ross. We’re going back to Halsey’s Planet,
where you came from. Maybe Haarland can tell us what to
do.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Go ’head. <i>That</i> wise guy!” Ross sneered.</p>

<p class="c007">The attendant was watching dubiously as Bernie
slammed out and Ross peered at himself in a mirror.
“Dime?” the attendant asked in his tired voice. Ross gave
him one and went back to the party.</p>

<p class="c007">Somehow it was not much fun.</p>

<p class="c007">He shuffled back to the bar. The boilermaker didn’t taste
too good. He set it down and glowered around the room.
The party was back in swing already; Helena and Bernie
were nowhere in sight. Let them go, then....</p>

<p class="c007">He drank, but only when he reminded himself to. This
party had become a costume ball; one of the men lurched
out of the room and staggered back guffawing. “Looka
him!” one of the women shrieked. “He got a woman’s hat
on! Horace, you get the craziest kinda ideas!”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross glowered. He suddenly realized that, while he
wasn’t exactly sober, he wasn’t drunk either. Those soreheads,
they had to go and spoil the party....</p>

<p class="c007">He began abruptly to get less drunk yet. Back to Halsey’s
Planet, they said? Ask Haarland what to do, they said?
Leave him here——?</p>

<p class="c007">He was cold sober.</p>

<p class="c007">He found a telephone. The automatic Central checked
the automatic Information and got him the Captain of the
Port, Baltimore Rocket Field. The Captain was helpful
and sympathetic; caught by the tense note in Ross’s voice
<span class="pageno" id="Page_155">155</span>when he told him who wannit to know, the Captain said,
“Gee, buddy, if I’d of known I woulda stopped them.
Stoled your ship, is that what they done? They could get
arrested for that. You could call the cops an’ maybe they
could do something——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross didn’t bother to explain. He hung up.</p>

<p class="c007">The party was no fun at all. He left it.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross walked along the street, hating himself. He couldn’t
hate Helena and Bernie; they had done the right thing. It
had been his fault, all the way down the line. He’d been
acting like a silly child; he’d had a job of work to do, and
he let himself be sidetracked by a crazy round of drinking
and parties.</p>

<p class="c007">Of course, he told himself, something had been accomplished.
Somebody had built the machines—not the happy
morons he had been playing with. Somebody had invented
whatever it was that flared with blue light and repaired the
idiot errors the morons made. Somebody, somewhere.</p>

<p class="c007">Where?</p>

<p class="c007">Well, he had some information. All negative. At the
parties had been soldiers and politicians and industrialists
and clergy and entertainers and, heaven save the mark,
scientists. And none of them had had the wit to do more
than push the Number Three Button when the Green Light
A blinked, by rote. None of them could have given him the
answer to the question that threatened to end human domination
over the cosmos; none of them would have known
what the words meant.</p>

<p class="c007">Maybe—Ross made himself face it—maybe there was
no answer. Maybe even if he found the intellects that
lurked beneath the surface on this ancient planet, they
could not or would not tell him what he wanted to know.
Maybe the intellects didn’t exist.</p>

<p class="c007">Maybe he was all wrong in all of his assumptions; maybe
he was wasting his time. But, he told himself wryly, he had
fixed it for himself that time was all he had left. He might
as well waste it. He might as well go right on looking....</p>

<p class="c007">A migrant party was staggering down the street toward
him, a score of persons going from one host’s home to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_156">156</span>another. He crossed to avoid them. They were singing drunkenly.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross looked at them with the distaste of the recently
reformed. One of the voices raised in song caught his ear:</p>

<p class="c009">“——bobbed his nose and dyed it rose, and kissed
his lady fair, And sat her down on a cushion brown in
a seven-legged chair. ‘By Jones,’ he said, ‘my shoes
are red, and so’s my overcoat, And with buttons
nine in a zigzag line, I’ll——’”</p>

<p class="c007">“Doc!” Ross bellowed. “Doc Jones! For God’s sake,
come over here!”</p>

<p class="c007">They got rid of the rest of Doctor Sam Jones’s party, and
Ross sobered the doctor up in an all-night restaurant. It
wasn’t hard; the doctor had had plenty of practice.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross filled him in, carefully explaining why Bernie and
Helena had left him. Doc Jones filled Ross in. He didn’t
have much to tell. He had come to in the ship, waited
around until he got hungry, fallen into a conversation with
a rocket pilot on the field—and that was how <i>his</i> round of
parties had begun.</p>

<p class="c007">Like Ross, Doc, in his soberer moments, had come to
the conclusion that Earth was run by person or persons unseen.
He had learned little that Ross hadn’t found out or
deduced. The blue lights had bothered him, too; he’d asked
the pilot about it, and found out about what Ross had—there
appeared to be some sort of built-in safety device
which kept the inevitable accidents from becoming unduly
fatal. How they worked, he didn’t know—</p>

<p class="c007">But he had an idea.</p>

<p class="c007">“It sounds a little ridiculous, I admit,” he said, embarrassed.
“But I think it might work. It’s a radio program.”</p>

<p class="c007">“A radio program?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I said it sounded ridiculous. They call it, ‘What’s Biting
You,’ and one of the fellows was telling me about it. It
seems that you can appear before the panel on the program
with any sort of problem, any sort at all, and they
guarantee to solve it for you. There’s some sort of bond
posted—I don’t know much about the details, but this
man assured me that the bond was only a formality; they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_157">157</span>never failed. Of course,” Doc finished, hearing his own
proposal with a touch of doubt, “I don’t know whether
they ever had any problem like this before, but——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” said Ross. “What have we got to lose?”</p>

<p class="c007">They got into the program. It took the techniques of a
doubler on an army chow line and a fair amount of brute
strength, but they got to the head of the queue at the
studio and wedged themselves inside. Doc came close to
throttling the man who prowled through the studio audience,
selecting the lucky few who would get on stage—but
they got on.</p>

<p class="c007">The theme music swelled majestically around them, and
a chorus crooned, “What’s Biting You—Hunh?” It was
repeated three times, with crashing cymbals under the
“Hunh?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross listened to the beginning of the program and
cursed himself for being persuaded into such a harebrained
tactic. But, he had to admit, the program offered the only
possibility in sight. The central figure was a huge, jovially
grinning figure of papier-mâché, smoking a Smog and billowing
smoke rings at the audience. An announcer, for some
obscure reason in blackface, interviewed the disturbed
derelicts who came before Smiley Smog, the papier-mâché
figure, and propounded their problems to Smiley in a sort
of doggerel. And in doggerel the answers came back.</p>

<p class="c007">The first person to go up before Smiley was a woman,
clearly in her last month of pregnancy. The announcer introduced
her to the audience and begged for a real loud
holler of hello for this poor mizzuble li’l girl. “Awright,
honey,” he said. “You just step right up here an’ let ol’
Uncle Smiley take care of your troubles for you. Less go,
now. What’s Bitin’ You?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Uh,” she sobbed, “it’s like I’m gonna have a baby.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Hoddya like that!” the announcer screamed. “She’s
gonna have a <i>baby!</i> Whaddya say to that, folks?” The
audience shrieked hysterically. “Awright, honey,” the announcer
said. “So you’re gonna have a baby, so what’s
bitin’ you about that?”</p>

<p class="c007">“It’s my husband,” the woman sniffled. “He don’t like
kids. We got eight already,” she explained. “Jack, he says
<span class="pageno" id="Page_158">158</span>if we have one more kid he’s gonna take off an’ marry somebody
else.”</p>

<p class="c007">“He’s gonna marry somebody else!” the announcer
howled. “Hoddya like that, folks?” There was a tempest
of boos. “Awright, now,” the announcer said, “you just
sit there, honey, while I tell ol’ Uncle Smiley about this. Ya
ready? Listen:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“What’s bitin’ this lady is plain to see:</div>
      <div class="line in1">Her husband don’t want no more family!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">The huge figure’s head rotated on a concealed hinge to
look down on the woman. From a squawk-box deep in
Smiley’s papier-mâché belly, a weary voice declaimed:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“If one more baby is your husband’s dread,</div>
      <div class="line in1">Cross him up, lady. Have twins instead!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">The audience roared its approval. The announcer asked
anxiously, “Ya get it? When ya get inta the hospital, like,
ya jus’ tell the nurse ya want to take <i>two</i> kids home with
you. See?”</p>

<p class="c007">The grateful woman staggered away. Ross gave Doc a
poisonous look.</p>

<p class="c007">“What else is there to do?” the doctor hissed. “All right,
perhaps this won’t work out—but let’s try!” He half rose,
and staggered against the man next to him, who was already
starting toward the announcer. “Go on, Ross,” Doc
hissed venomously, blocking off the other man.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross went. What else was there to do?</p>

<p class="c007">“What’s biting me,” he said belligerently before the announcer
could put him through the preliminaries, “is simply
this: L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the minus-T-over-two-N.”</p>

<p class="c007">Dead silence in the studio. The announcer quavered,
“Wh-what was that again, buddy?”</p>

<p class="c007">“I said,” Ross repeated firmly, “L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero
e to the——”</p>

<p class="c007">“Now, wait a minute, buddy,” the announcer ordered.
“We never had no stuff like that on <i>this</i> program before.
Whaddya, some kind of a wise guy?”</p>

<p class="c007">There might have been violence; the conditions were
right for it. But Uncle Smiley Smog saved the day.</p>

<p class="c007">The papier-mâché figure puffed a blinding series of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_159">159</span>smoke rings at Ross. From its molded torso, the weary
voice said:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c000">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“If you’re looking for counsel sagacious and wise,</div>
      <div class="line in1">The price is ten cents. It’s right under your eyes.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c007">They left the studio in a storm of animosity.</p>

<p class="c007">“Maybe we could have collected the forfeit,” Doc said
hopefully.</p>

<p class="c007">“Maybe we could have collected some lumps,” Ross
growled. “Got any more ideas?”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor sipped his coffee. “No,” he admitted. “I
wonder—No, I don’t suppose that means anything.”</p>

<p class="c007">“That jingle? Sure it means something, Doc. It means
I should have had my head examined for letting you talk
me into that performance.”</p>

<p class="c007">The doctor said rebelliously, “Maybe I’m wrong, Ross,
but I don’t see that you’ve had any ideas than panned out
much better.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross got up. “All right,” he admitted. “I’m sorry if I
gave you a hard time. It’s all this coffee and all the liquor
underneath it; I swear, if I ever get back to a civilized
planet I’m going on a solid diet for a month.”</p>

<p class="c007">They headed for the room marked “Gents,” Ross sullenly
quiet, Doc thoughtfully quiet.</p>

<p class="c007">Doc said reflectively, “‘The price is ten cents.’ Ross,
could that mean a paper that we could buy on a newsstand,
maybe?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Yeah,” Ross said in irritation. “Look, Doc, don’t give
it another thought. There must be some way to straighten
this thing out; I’ll think of it. Let’s just make believe that
whole asinine radio program never happened.” The attendant
materialized and offered Ross a towel.</p>

<p class="c007">“Dime?” he said wearily.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross fished absently in his pocket. “The thing that
bothers me, Doc,” he said, “is that I know there are intelligent
people somewhere around. I even know what
they’re doing, I bet. They’re doing exactly what I tried to
do: acted as stupid as anybody else, or stupider. I’d make
a guess,” he said, warming up, “that if we could just make
a statistical analysis of the whole planet and find the absolute
stupidest-seeming people of the lot, we’d——”</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_160">160</span>He ran out of breath all at once. His eyes bulged.</p>

<p class="c007">He looked at the men’s-room attendant, and at the ten-cent
piece in his own hand.</p>

<p class="c007">“You!” he breathed.</p>

<p class="c007">The attendant’s face suddenly seemed to come to life.
In a voice that was abruptly richer and deeper than before,
the man said: “Yes. You had to find us yourself, you
know.”</p>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_161">161</span>
  <h2 class="c005" title="Chapter 14"><span class="xxlarge"><b>..... 14</b></span></h2>
</div>

<p class="c006">THERE was a home base, a gigantic island
called Australia, to which they took Ross and Doc
Jones in a little car that sprouted no wings and flashed no
rockets, but flew.</p>

<p class="c007">They lived underground there, invisible to goggling passengers
and crewmen aboard the “rockets.” (They weren’t
rockets. They were turbo-jets. But it made the children
happy to think that they had rockets, so iron filings were
added to the hot jet stream, and they sparkled in magnificent
display.)</p>

<p class="c007">There they were born, and there they spent strange childhoods,
learning such things as psychodynamics and teleportation.
By the time they were eight months or so old
they thought it amusing to converse of Self and the Meaning
of Meaning. By eighteen months a dozen infants would
chat in <i>terza rima</i>. But by the age of two they had put such
toys behind them with a sigh of pleasant regret. They would
revert to them only for such purposes as love-making or
choral funeral addresses.</p>

<p class="c007">They were then of an age to begin their work.</p>

<p class="c007">They were born there, and trained there for terrible tasks.
And they died there, at whatever risk. For that they would
not surrender: their right to die among their own.</p>

<p class="c007"><span class="pageno" id="Page_162">162</span>But their lives between cradle and grave, those they
gave away.</p>

<p class="c007">Nursemaids? What else can one call them?</p>

<p class="c007">They explained it patiently to Ross and the doctor.</p>

<p class="c007">“The pattern emerged clearly in the twentieth century.
Swarming slums abrawl with children, children, children
everywhere. Walk down a Chicago Southside street, and
walk away with the dazed impression that all the world was
pregnant. Walk through pretty, pleasant Evanston, and
find the impression wrong. Those who lived in Evanston
were reasonable people. They waited and thought. Being
reasonable, they saved and planned. Being reasonable, they
resorted to gadgets or chemicals or continence.</p>

<p class="c007">“A woman of the period had some three hundred and
ninety opportunities to conceive a child. In the slums and
the hills they took advantage of as many of them as they
might. But around the universities, in the neighborhoods
of the well-educated and the well-to-do, what was the
score?</p>

<p class="c007">“First, education, until the age of twenty. This left two
hundred and ninety-nine opportunities. Then, for perhaps
five years, shared work; the car, the mortgage, the furniture,
that two salaries would pay off earlier than one. Two
hundred and thirty-four opportunities were left. Some of
them were seized: a spate of childbearing perhaps would
come next. But subtract a good ten years more at the end of
the cycle, for the years when a child would be simply too,
late—too late for fashion, too late for companionship with
the first-born. We started with three hundred and ninety
opportunities. We have, perhaps, one hundred and forty-four
left.</p>

<p class="c007">“Is that the roster complete? No. There is the battle of
the budget: No, not right now, not until the summer place
is paid for. And more. The visits from the mothers-in-law,
the quarterly tax payments, the country-club liaisons and
the furtive knives behind the brownstone fronts and what
becomes of fertility—they have all been charted. But these
are superfluous. The ratio 390:144 points out the inevitable.
As three hundred and ninety outweighs one hundred
<span class="pageno" id="Page_163">163</span>and forty-four, so the genes of the slovenly and heedless
outweigh the thoughtful and slow to act.</p>

<p class="c007">“We tampered with the inevitable.</p>

<p class="c007">“The planet teemed and burst. The starships went forth.
The strong, bright, quick ones went out in the ships. Two
sorts were left: The strong ones who were not bright, the
bright ones who were not strong.</p>

<p class="c007">“We are the prisoners of the planet. We cannot leave.</p>

<p class="c007">“The children—the witless ones outside—can leave.
But who would have them?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross peered into the shifting shadows. “But,” he said,
“you are the masters of the planet——”</p>

<p class="c007">“<i>Masters?</i> We are slaves! Fully alive only here where
we are born and die. Abstracted and as witless as they
when we are among <i>them</i>—well we might be. For each of
us, square miles to stand guard over. Our minds roving
across the traps we dare not ignore, ready to leap out and
straighten these children’s toppling walls of blocks, ready
to warn the child that sharp things cut and hot things burn.
The blue lights—did you think they were machines?” They
were <i>us</i>!</p>

<p class="c007">“You’re torturing yourselves!” Ross exploded. “Let
them die.”</p>

<p class="c007">“Let—ten—billion—children—die? We are not such
monsters.”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross was humbled before their tragedy. Diffidently he
spoke of Halsey’s Planet, Ragansworld, Azor, Jones. He
warmed to the task and was growing, he thought, eloquent
when their smiles left him standing ashamed.</p>

<p class="c007">“I don’t understand,” he said, almost weeping.</p>

<p class="c007">The voice corrected him: “You do. But you do not—yet—know
that you do. Consider the facts:</p>

<p class="c007">“Your planet. Sterile and slowly dying.</p>

<p class="c007">“The planets you have seen. One sterile because it is
imprisoned by ancients, one sterile under an in-driven matriarchal
custom, one sterile because all traces of divergence
have been wiped out.</p>

<p class="c007">“Earth. Split into an incurable dichotomy—the sterility
of brainless health, the sterility of sick intellect.</p>

<p class="c007">“Humanity, then, imprisoned in a thousand sterile tubes,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_164">164</span>cut off each from the other, dying. We feared war, and so
we isolated the members with a wall of time. We have
found something worse to fear. What if the walls are
cracked?”</p>

<p class="c007">“Crack the walls? How? Is it too late?”</p>

<p class="c007">Somehow the image of Helena was before him.</p>

<p class="c007">“Is it too late?” they gently mocked. “Surely you know.
How? Perhaps you will ask her.”</p>

<p class="c007">The image of Helena was blushing.</p>

<p class="c007">Ross’s heart leaped. “As simple as that?”</p>

<p class="c007">“For you, yes. For others there will be lives spent over
the lathes and milling machines, eyes gone blind in calculating
and refining trajectories, daring ones lost screaming
in the hearts of stars, or gibbering with hunger and pain
as the final madness closes down on them, stranded between
galaxies. There will be martyrs to undergo the worst
martyrdom of all—which is to say, they will never know
of it. They will be unhappy traders and stock-chasers,
grinding their lives to smooth dull blanks against the wearying
routine so that the daring ones may go forth to the stars.
But for you—you have seen the answer.</p>

<p class="c007">“Old blood runs thin. Thin blood runs cold. Cold blood
dies. Let the walls crack.”</p>

<p class="c007">There was a murmuring in the shadows that Ross could
not hear. Then the voice again, saying a sort of good-by.</p>

<p class="c007">“We have had a great deal of experience with children,
so we know that they must not be told too much. There
is nothing more you need be told. You will go back
now——”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross dared interrupt. “But our ship—the others have
taken it away——”</p>

<p class="c007">Again the soundless laughter. “The ship has not been
taken far. Did you think we would leave you stranded
here?”</p>

<p class="c007">Ross peered hard into the shadows. But only the shadows
were there, and then he and Jones were in the shadows no
longer.</p>

<p class="c007">“Ross!” Helena was hysterical with joy. Even Bernie
was stammering and shaking his head incredulously. “Ross,
dearest! We thought—And the ship acted all <i>funny</i>, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_165">165</span>then it landed here and there just wasn’t anybody around,
and I couldn’t make it go again——”</p>

<p class="c007">“It will go now,” Ross promised. It did. They sealed
ship; he took the controls; and they hung in space, looking
back on a blue-green planet with a single moon.</p>

<p class="c007">There were questions; but Ross put an end to questions.
He said, “We’re going back to Halsey’s Planet. Haarland
wanted an answer. We’ve found it; we’ll bring it to him.
The F-T-L families have kept their secret too well. No
wars between the planets—but stagnation worse than wars.
And Haarland’s answer is this: He will be the first of the
F-T-L traders. He’ll build F-T-L ships, and he’ll carelessly
let their secrets be stolen. We’ll bridge the galaxy with
F-T-L transports; and we’ll pack the ships with a galaxy
of crews! New genes for old; hybrid vigor for dreary decay!</p>

<p class="c007">“Do you see it?” His voice was ringing loud; Helena’s
eyes on him were adoring. “Mate Jones to Azor, Halsey’s
Planet to Earth. Smash the smooth, declining curve! Cross
the strains, and then breed them back. Let mankind become
genetically wild again instead of rabbits isolated in
their sterile hutches!”</p>

<p class="c007">Exultantly he set up the combinations for Halsey’s Planet
on the Wesley board.</p>

<p class="c007">Helena was beside him, proud and close, as he threw
in the drive.</p>
