<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<p>From birth to puberty you were an infant. From puberty to Dobermann’s age, a junior. For ten years after that you went to school, learning the things you had neither the need nor the right to know before.</p>
			<p>And then you were Of Age.</p>
			<p>Being Of Age meant much, much more than voting, Ross found out. For one thing, it meant freedom to marry⁠—after the enforced sexlessness of the junior years and the directed breeding via artificial insemination of the Scholars. It meant a healthy head start on seniority, which carried with it all offices and all power.</p>
			<p>It meant freedom.</p>
			<p>As a bare beginning, it meant the freedom to command any number of juniors or scholars. On Ross’s last punitive day in the dye vats, a happy ancient commandeered the entire staff to help set shrubs in his front lawn⁠—a good dozen acres of careful landscaping it was, and the prettiest sight Ross had seen on this ugly planet.</p>
			<p>When they got back to the dye vats, the yellow and blue had boiled over, and broken strands of yarn had fouled all the bobbins. Dobermann raged⁠—at the juniors.</p>
			<p>But then Dobermann’s raging came to an end forever. It was the night before Holiday, and there was a pretty ceremony as he packed his kit and got ready to turn Junior Unit Twenty-three over to his successor. Everyone was scrubbed, and though a certain amount of license in regard to neatness was allowed between dinner and lights out, each bunk was made and carefully smoothed free of wrinkles. After half an hour of fidgety waiting, Dobermann called⁠—needlessly⁠—for attention, and the minister came in with his ancient retinue.</p>
			<p>The rich mechanical voice boomed out from his breastplate: “Junior Dobermann, today you are a man!”</p>
			<p>Dobermann stood with his head bowed, silent and content. Junior Unit Twenty-Three chanted antiphonally: “Goodbye, Junior Dobermann!”</p>
			<p>The retinue took three steps forward, and the minister boomed, “Beauty comes with age. Age is beauty!”</p>
			<p>And the chorus: “Old heads are wisest!” Ross, standing as straight as any of them, faked the words with his lips and tongue, and wondered how many repetitions had drilled those sentiments into Junior Unit Twenty-Three.</p>
			<p>There were five more chants, and five responses, and then the minister and his court of four were standing next to Dobermann. Breathing heavily from his exertions, the minister reached behind him and took a book from the hands of the nearest of his retinue. He said, panting, “Scholar Dobermann, in the Book lies the words of the Fathers. Read them and learn.”</p>
			<p>The chorus cried thrice, “The Word of the Fathers Is Law.” And then the minister touched Dobermann’s hand, and in solemn silence, left.</p>
			<p>As soon as the elders had gone, the juniors flocked around Dobermann to wish him well. There was excited laughter in the congratulations, and a touch of apprehension too: Dobermann, with all his faults, was a known quantity, and the members of Junior Unit Twenty-Three were beginning to look a little fearfully at the short, redheaded youth who, from the next day on, would be Dobermann’s successor.</p>
			<p>Ross promised himself: He can be good or bad, a blessing or a problem. But he won’t be <em>my</em> problem. I’m getting out of here tomorrow!</p>
			<p>Holiday.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it’s fun,” Helena told him enthusiastically. “First you get up early to get the voting out of the way⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Voting?”</p>
			<p>“Sure. Don’t they vote where you come from? I thought everybody voted. That’s democracy, like we have it here.”</p>
			<p>He sardonically quoted one of the omnipresent wall signs: “<b>The happiness of the majority means the happiness of the minority.</b>” He had often wondered what, if anything, it meant. But Helena solemnly nodded.</p>
			<p>They were whispering from their adjoining cots by dim, false dawn filtering through the windows on Holiday morning. They were not the only whisperers. Things were relaxing already.</p>
			<p>“Ross,” Helena said.</p>
			<p>“Yes?”</p>
			<p>“I thought maybe you might not know. On Holiday if you, ah, want to do that again you don’t have to wait until I faint. Ah, of course you don’t do it right out in the open.” Overcome by her own daring she buried her head under the coarse blanket.</p>
			<p>Fine, thought Ross wearily. Once a year⁠—or did Holiday come once a year?⁠—the kids were allowed to play “Spin The Bottle.” No doubt their elders thought it was too cute for words: mere tots of thirty and thirty-five childishly and innocently experimenting with sex. Of course it would be discreetly supervised so that nobody would Get In Trouble.</p>
			<p>He was quite sure Helena’s last two faints had been unconvincing phonies.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The wake-up whistle blew at last. The chattering members of Junior Unit Twenty-Three dawdled while they dressed, and the new foreman indulgently passed out shabby, smutted ribbons which the girls tied in their hair. They had sugar on their mush for breakfast, and Ross’s stomach came near turning as he heard burbles of gratitude at the feast.</p>
			<p>With pushing and a certain amount of inexpert horseplay they formed a column of fours and hiked from the hall⁠—from the whole factory complex, indeed, along a rubberized highway.</p>
			<p>Once you got out of the factory area things became pleasanter by the mile. Hortatory roadside signs thinned out and vanished. Stinking middens of industrial waste were left behind. And then the landscape was rolling, sodded acres with the road pleasantly springy underfoot, the air clean and crisp.</p>
			<p>They oohed and aahed at houses glimpsed occasionally in the distance⁠—always rambling, one-story affairs that looked spanking-new.</p>
			<p>Once a car overhauled them on the highway and slowed to a crawl. It was a huge thing, richly upholstered within. A pair of grimlooking youths were respectively chauffeur and footman; the passenger waved at the troop from Junior Twenty-Three and grinned out of a fantastic landscape of wrinkles. Ross gaped. Had he thought the visiting minister was old? This creature, male or female, was <em>old</em>.</p>
			<p>After the car sped on, to the cheers of the marchers, there was happy twittering speculation. Junior Twenty-Three didn’t recognize the Citizen who had graciously waved to them, but they thought he⁠—or she?⁠—was wonderful. So dignified, so distinguished, so learned, so gracious, so democratic!</p>
			<p>“Wasn’t it sweet of him?” Helena burbled. “And I’m sure he must be somebody important connected with the voting, otherwise he’d just vote from home.”</p>
			<p>Ross’s feet were beginning to hurt when they reached the suburban center. To the best of his recollection, they were no more than eight or ten kilos from the field and his starship. Backtrack on the road to the suburban center about three kilos, take the fork to the right, and that would be that.</p>
			<p>Junior Twenty-Three reached a pitch of near-ecstasy marveling at the low, spacious buildings of the center. Through sweeping, transparent windows they saw acres of food and clothing in the shopping center; the Drive-In Theater was an architectural miracle. The Civic Center almost finished them off, with its statue of Equal Justice Under the Law (a dignified beldame whose chin and nose almost met, leaning on a gem-crusted crutch) and Civic Virtue (in a motorized wheelchair equipped with an emergency oxygen tent, Lindbergh-Carrel auxiliary blood pump and an artificial kidney).</p>
			<p>Merry oldsters were everywhere in their cars and wheelchairs, gaily waving at the kids. Only one untoward incident marred their prevoting tour of inspection. A thickheaded young man mistakenly called out a cheerful: “Life and wisdom, ma’am!” to a beaming oldster.</p>
			<p>“Ma’am, is it?” the oldster roared through his throat mike and amplifier in an unmistakable baritone. “I’ll ma’am you, you wise punk!” He spun his wheelchair on a decishield, threw it into high and roared down on the offender, running him over. The boy covered himself as well as he could while the raging old man backed over him again and ran over him again. His ordeal ended when the oldster collapsed forward in the chair, hanging from his safety belt.</p>
			<p>The boy got up with tire marks on him and groaned: “Oh, lord! I’ve hurt him.” He appealed hysterically: “What’ll I do? Is he dead?”</p>
			<p>Another Senior Citizen buzzed up and snapped: “Cut in his L-C heart, you booby!”</p>
			<p>The boy turned on the Lindbergh-Carrel pump, trembling. The white-faced juniors of Twenty-Three watched as the tubes to the oldster’s left arm throbbed and pulsed. A massive sigh went up when the old man’s eyes opened and he sat up groggily. “What happened?”</p>
			<p>“You died again, Sherrington,” said the other elder. “Third time this week⁠—good thing there was a responsible person around. Now get over to the medical center this minute and have a complete checkup. Hear me?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Dad,” Sherrington said weakly. He rolled off in low gear.</p>
			<p>His father turned to the youngster who stood vacantly rubbing the tire marks on his face. “Since it’s Holiday,” he grated, “I’ll let this pass. On any other day I would have seen to it that you were set back fifteen years for your disgraceful negligence.”</p>
			<p>Ross knew by then what that meant, and shuddered with the rest. It amounted to a death sentence, did fifteen additional years of the grinding toil and marginal diet of a junior.</p>
			<p>Somewhat dampened they proceeded to the Hall of Democracy, a glittering place replete with slogans, statues, and heroic portraits of the heroic aged. Twenty-Three huddled together as it joined with a stream of juniors from the area’s other factory units. Most of them were larger than the cable works; many of them, apparently, involved more wearing and hazardous occupations. Some groups coughed incessantly and were red-eyed from the irritation of some chemical. Others must have been heavy-manual-labor specialists. They were divided into the hale, whose muscles bulged amazingly, and the dying⁠—men and women who obviously could not take the work but who were doing it anyway.</p>
			<p>They seated themselves at long benches, with push buttons at each station. Helena, next to him, explained the system to Ross. Voting was universal and simultaneous, in all the Halls of Democracy around the planet and from all the homes of the Senior Citizens who did not choose to vote from a Hall. Simultaneously the votes were counted at a central station and the results were flashed to screens in the Centers and homes. She said a number of enthusiastic things about Democracy while Ross studied a sheet on which the candidates and propositions were listed.</p>
			<p>The names meant nothing to him. He noted only that each of three candidates for Chief of State was one hundred thirty years old, that each of three candidates for First Assistant Chief was one hundred and twenty-seven years old, and so on. Obviously the nominating conventions by agreement named candidates of the same age for each office to keep it a contest.</p>
			<p>Proposition One read: “To dismantle seven pediatric centers and apply the salvage value to the construction of, and the funds no longer required for their maintenance to the maintenance of, a new wing of the Gerontological Center, said wing to be devoted to basic research in the extension of human life.”</p>
			<p>Proposition Two was worse. Ross didn’t bother to read the rest of them. He whispered hoarsely to Helena, “What next?”</p>
			<p>“Ssh!” She pointed to a screen at the front of the Hall. “It’s starting.”</p>
			<p>A Senior Citizen of a very high rank (his face was entirely hidden by an oxygen mask) was speaking from the screen. There was what seemed to be a ritual speech of invocation, then he got down to business. “Citizens,” he said through his throat mike, “behold Democracy in Action! I give you three candidates for Chief of State⁠—look them over, and make up your minds. First, Citizen Raphael Flexner, age one century, three decades, seven months, ten days.” Senior Citizen Flexner rolled on screen, spoke briefly through his throat mike and rolled off. The first speaker said again, “Behold Democracy in Action! See now Citizen Sheridan Farnsworth, age one century, three decades, ten months, forty-two days.” Applause boomed louder; some of the younger juniors yelled hysterically and drummed their heels on the floor.</p>
			<p>Helena was panting with excitement, eyes bright on the screen. “Isn’t it <em>wonderful</em>?” she gasped ecstatically. “Oh, look at <em>him</em>!”</p>
			<p>“Him” was the third candidate, and the first oldster Ross had seen whose gocart was a wheeled stretcher. Prone and almost invisible through the clusters of tubing and chromed equipment, Senior Citizen Immanuel Appleby acknowledged his introduction⁠—“Age one century, three decades, eleven months and five days!” The crowd went mad; Helena broke from Ross’s side and joined a long yelling snake dance through the corridors.</p>
			<p>Ross yelled experimentally as protective coloration, then found himself yelling because everybody was yelling, because he couldn’t help it. By the time the speaker on the screen began to call for order, Ross was standing on top of the voting bench and screaming his head off.</p>
			<p>Helena, weeping with excitement, tugged at his leg. “Vote now, Ross,” she begged, and all over the hall the cry was “Vote! Vote!”</p>
			<p>Ross reached out for the voting buttons. “What do we do now?” he asked Helena.</p>
			<p>“Push the button marked ‘Appleby,’ of course. Hurry!”</p>
			<p>“But why Appleby?” Ross objected. “That fellow Flexner, for instance⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hush, Ross! Somebody might be listening.” There was sickening fright on Helena’s face. “Didn’t you hear? We <em>have</em> to vote for the best man. ‘Oldest Is Bestest,’ you know. That’s what Democracy <em>means</em>, the freedom of choice. They read us the ages, and we choose which is oldest. Now please, Ross, hurry before somebody starts asking questions!”</p>
			<p>The voting was over, and the best man had won in every case. It was a triumph for informed public opinion. The mob poured out of the hall in happy-go-lucky order, all precedences and formalities suspended for Holiday.</p>
			<p>Helena grasped Ross firmly by the arm. The crowd was spreading over the quiet acres surrounding the Center, each little cluster heedlessly intent on a long-planned project of its own. Under the pressure of Helena’s arm, Ross found himself swerving toward a clump of shrubbery.</p>
			<p>He said violently, “No! That is, I mean I’m sorry, Helena, but I’ve got something to do.”</p>
			<p>She stared at him with shock in her eyes. “On Holiday?”</p>
			<p>“On Holiday. Truly, Helena, I’m sorry. Look, what you said last night⁠—from now till tomorrow morning, I can do what I want, right?”</p>
			<p>Sullenly, “Yes. I <em>thought</em>, Ross, that I <em>knew</em> what⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Okay.” He jerked his arm away, feeling like all of the hundred possible kinds of a skunk. “See you around,” he said over his shoulder. He did not look back.</p>
			<p>Three kilos back, he told himself firmly, then the right-hand fork in the road. And not more than a dozen kilos, at the most, to the spaceport. He could do it in a couple of hours.</p>
			<p>One thing had been established for certain: If ever there had been a “Franklin Foundation” on this planet, it was gone for good now. Dismantled, no doubt, to provide building materials for an eartrumpet plant. No doubt the little F-T-L ship that the Franklin Foundation was supposed to cover for was still swinging in an orbit within easy range of the spaceport; but the chance that anybody would ever find it, or use it if found, was pretty close to zero. If they bothered to maintain a radar watch at all⁠—any other watch than the fully automatic one set to respond only to highvelocity interstellar ships⁠—and if anyone ever took time to look at the radar plot, no doubt the F-T-L ship was charted. As an asteroid, satellite, derelict or “body of unknown origin.” Certainly no one of these smug oldsters would take the trouble to investigate.</p>
			<p>The only problem to solve on this planet was how to get off it⁠—fast.</p>
			<p>On the road ahead of him was what appeared to be a combination sex orgy and free-for-all. It rolled in a yelling, milling mob of half a hundred excited juniors across the road toward him, then swerved into the fields as a cluster of screaming women broke free and ran, and the rest of the crowd roared after them.</p>
			<p>Ross quickened his step. If he ever did get off this planet, it would have to be today; he was not fool enough to think that any ordinary day would give him the freedom to poke around the spaceport’s defenses. And it would be just his luck, he thought bitterly, to get involved in a gang fight on the way to the port.</p>
			<p>There was a squeal of tires behind him, and a little vehicle screeched to a halt. Ross threw up a defensive arm in automatic reflex.</p>
			<p>But it was only Helena, awkwardly fumbling open the door of the car. “Get in,” she said sourly. “You’ve spoiled <em>my</em> Holiday. Might as well do what <em>you</em> want to do.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“What’s that?”</p>
			<p>Helena looked where he was pointing, and shrugged. “Guard box,” she guessed. “How would I know? Nobody’s in it, anyhow.”</p>
			<p>Ross nodded. They had abandoned the car and were standing outside a long, seamless fence that surrounded the spaceport. The main gates were closed and locked; a few hundred feet to the right was a smaller gate with a sort of pillbox, but that had every appearance of being locked too.</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Ross. “See that shed with the boxes outside it? Over we go.”</p>
			<p>The shed was right up against the fence; the metal boxes gave a sort of rough and just barely climbable foothold. Helena was easy enough to lift to the top of the shed; Ross, grunting, managed to clamber after her.</p>
			<p>They looked down at the ground on the other side, a dozen feet away. “You don’t have to come along,” Ross told her.</p>
			<p>“That’s just <em>like</em> you!” she flared. “Cast me aside⁠—trample on me!”</p>
			<p>“All right, all right.” Ross looked around, but neither junior nor elder was anywhere in sight. “Hang by your hands and then drop,” he advised her. “Get moving before somebody shows up.”</p>
			<p>“On Holiday?” she asked bitterly. She squirmed over the narrow top of the fence, legs dangling, let herself down as far as she could, and let go. Ross watched anxiously, but she got up quickly enough and moved to one side.</p>
			<p>Ross plopped down next to her, knocking the wind out of himself. He got up dizzily.</p>
			<p>His ship, in lonesome quiet, was less than a quarter of a mile away. “Let’s go,” Ross panted, and clutched her hand. They skirted another shed and were in the clear, running as fast as they could.</p>
			<p>Almost in the clear.</p>
			<p>Ross heard the whine of the little scooter before he felt the blow, but it was too late. He sprawled on the ground, dragging Helena after him.</p>
			<p>A Senior Citizen with a long-handled rod of the sort Ross remembered all too well was scowling down at them. “Children,” he rumbled through his breast-speaker in a voice of awful disgust, “is this the way to act on Holiday?”</p>
			<p>Helena, gibbering in terror, was beyond words. Ross croaked, “Sorry, sir. We⁠—we were just⁠—”</p>
			<p>Crash! The rod came down again, and every muscle in Ross’s body convulsed. He rolled helplessly away, the elder following him. Crash! “We give you Holiday,” the elder boomed, “and⁠—” crash “⁠⸺⁠you act like animals. Terrible! Don’t you know that freedom of play on Holiday⁠—” crash “⁠⸺⁠is the most sacred right of every junior⁠—” crash “⁠⸺⁠and heaven help you⁠—” crash “⁠⸺⁠if you abuse it!”</p>
			<p>The wrenching punishment and the caressing voice stopped together. Ross lay blinking into the terrible silence that followed. He became conscious of Helena’s weeping, and forced his head to turn to look at her.</p>
			<p>She was standing behind the elder’s scooter, a length of wire in her hand. The senior lay slumped against his safety strap. “Ross!” she moaned. “Ross, what have I done? <em>I turned him off!</em>”</p>
			<p>He stood up, coughing and retching. No one else was in sight, only the two of them and the silent, slack form of the old man. He grabbed her arm. “Come on,” he said fuzzily, and started toward the starship.</p>
			<p>She hung back, mumbling to herself, her eyes saucers. She was in a state of grievous shock, it was clear.</p>
			<p>Ross hesitated, rubbing his back. He knew that she might never pull out of it. Even if she did, she was certain to be a frightful handicap. But it was crystal-clear that she had declared herself on his side. Even if the elder could be revived, the punishment in store for Helena would be awful to contemplate⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Come what may, he was now responsible for Helena.</p>
			<p>He towed her to the starship. She climbed in docilely enough, sat staring blankly as he sealed ship and sent it blasting off the face of the planet.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She didn’t speak until they were well into deep space. Then the blank stare abruptly clouded and she exploded in a fit of tears. Ross said ineffectually, “There, there.” It had no effect; until, in its own time, the storm ended.</p>
			<p>Helena said hoarsely, “Wh-what do I do now?”</p>
			<p>“Why, I guess you come right along with me,” Ross said heartily, cursing his luck.</p>
			<p>“Where’s that?”</p>
			<p>“Where? You mean, where?” Ross scratched his head. “Well, let’s see. Frankly, Helena, your planet was quite a disappointment to me. I had hoped⁠—⁠Well, no matter. I suppose the best thing to do is to look up the next planet on the list.”</p>
			<p>“What list?”</p>
			<p>Ross hesitated, then shrugged and plunged into the explanation. All about the longliners and the message and faster-than-light travel and the Wesley Families⁠—and none of it, while he was talking, seemed convincing at all. But perhaps Helena was less critical; or perhaps Helena simply did not care. She listened attentively and made no comment. She only said, at the end, “What’s the name of the next planet?”</p>
			<p>He consulted the master charts. Haarland’s listing showed a place called Azor, conveniently near at hand in the strange geodesics of the Wesley Effect, where the far galaxies might be near at hand in the warped space-lines, and the void just beyond the viewplates be infinitely distant. The F-T-L family of Azor was named Cavallo; when last heard from, they had been builders of machine tools.</p>
			<p>Ross told Helena about it. She shrugged and watched curiously as he began to set up the F-T-L problem on the huge board.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
