<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>There was a home base, a gigantic island called Australia, to which they took Ross and Doc Jones in a little car that sprouted no wings and flashed no rockets, but flew.</p>
			<p>They lived underground there, invisible to goggling passengers and crewmen aboard the “rockets.” (They weren’t rockets. They were turbojets. But it made the children happy to think that they had rockets, so iron filings were added to the hot jet stream, and they sparkled in magnificent display.)</p>
			<p>There they were born, and there they spent strange childhoods, learning such things as psychodynamics and teleportation. By the time they were eight months or so old they thought it amusing to converse of Self and the Meaning of Meaning. By eighteen months a dozen infants would chat in terza rima. But by the age of two they had put such toys behind them with a sigh of pleasant regret. They would revert to them only for such purposes as lovemaking or choral funeral addresses.</p>
			<p>They were then of an age to begin their work.</p>
			<p>They were born there, and trained there for terrible tasks. And they died there, at whatever risk. For that they would not surrender: their right to die among their own.</p>
			<p>But their lives between cradle and grave, those they gave away.</p>
			<p>Nursemaids? What else can one call them?</p>
			<p>They explained it patiently to Ross and the doctor.</p>
			<p>“The pattern emerged clearly in the twentieth century. Swarming slums abrawl with children, children, children everywhere. Walk down a Chicago Southside street, and walk away with the dazed impression that all the world was pregnant. Walk through pretty, pleasant Evanston, and find the impression wrong. Those who lived in Evanston were reasonable people. They waited and thought. Being reasonable, they saved and planned. Being reasonable, they resorted to gadgets or chemicals or continence.</p>
			<p>“A woman of the period had some three hundred and ninety opportunities to conceive a child. In the slums and the hills they took advantage of as many of them as they might. But around the universities, in the neighborhoods of the well-educated and the well-to-do, what was the score?</p>
			<p>“First, education, until the age of twenty. This left two hundred and ninety-nine opportunities. Then, for perhaps five years, shared work; the car, the mortgage, the furniture, that two salaries would pay off earlier than one. Two hundred and thirty-four opportunities were left. Some of them were seized: a spate of childbearing perhaps would come next. But subtract a good ten years more at the end of the cycle, for the years when a child would be simply too late⁠—too late for fashion, too late for companionship with the firstborn. We started with three hundred and ninety opportunities. We have, perhaps, one hundred and forty-four left.</p>
			<p>“Is that the roster complete? No. There is the battle of the budget: No, not right now, not until the summer place is paid for. And more. The visits from the mothers-in-law, the quarterly tax payments, the country-club liaisons and the furtive knives behind the brownstone fronts and what becomes of fertility⁠—they have all been charted. But these are superfluous. The ratio 390:144 points out the inevitable. As three hundred and ninety outweighs one hundred and forty-four, so the genes of the slovenly and heedless outweigh the thoughtful and slow to act.</p>
			<p>“We tampered with the inevitable.</p>
			<p>“The planet teemed and burst. The starships went forth. The strong, bright, quick ones went out in the ships. Two sorts were left: The strong ones who were not bright, the bright ones who were not strong.</p>
			<p>“We are the prisoners of the planet. We cannot leave.</p>
			<p>“The children⁠—the witless ones outside⁠—can leave. But who would have them?”</p>
			<p>Ross peered into the shifting shadows. “But,” he said, “you are the masters of the planet⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<em>Masters?</em> We are slaves! Fully alive only here where we are born and die. Abstracted and as witless as they when we are among <em>them</em>⁠—well we might be. For each of us, square miles to stand guard over. Our minds roving across the traps we dare not ignore, ready to leap out and straighten these children’s toppling walls of blocks, ready to warn the child that sharp things cut and hot things burn. The blue lights⁠—did you think they were machines?” They were <em>us</em>!</p>
			<p>“You’re torturing yourselves!” Ross exploded. “Let them die.”</p>
			<p>“Let⁠—ten⁠—billion⁠—children⁠—die? We are not such monsters.”</p>
			<p>Ross was humbled before their tragedy. Diffidently he spoke of Halsey’s Planet, Ragansworld, Azor, Jones. He warmed to the task and was growing, he thought, eloquent when their smiles left him standing ashamed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand,” he said, almost weeping.</p>
			<p>The voice corrected him: “You do. But you do not⁠—yet⁠—know that you do. Consider the facts:</p>
			<p>“Your planet. Sterile and slowly dying.</p>
			<p>“The planets you have seen. One sterile because it is imprisoned by ancients, one sterile under an in-driven matriarchal custom, one sterile because all traces of divergence have been wiped out.</p>
			<p>“Earth. Split into an incurable dichotomy⁠—the sterility of brainless health, the sterility of sick intellect.</p>
			<p>“Humanity, then, imprisoned in a thousand sterile tubes, cut off each from the other, dying. We feared war, and so we isolated the members with a wall of time. We have found something worse to fear. What if the walls are cracked?”</p>
			<p>“Crack the walls? How? Is it too late?”</p>
			<p>Somehow the image of Helena was before him.</p>
			<p>“Is it too late?” they gently mocked. “Surely you know. How? Perhaps you will ask her.”</p>
			<p>The image of Helena was blushing.</p>
			<p>Ross’s heart leaped. “As simple as that?”</p>
			<p>“For you, yes. For others there will be lives spent over the lathes and milling machines, eyes gone blind in calculating and refining trajectories, daring ones lost screaming in the hearts of stars, or gibbering with hunger and pain as the final madness closes down on them, stranded between galaxies. There will be martyrs to undergo the worst martyrdom of all⁠—which is to say, they will never know of it. They will be unhappy traders and stock-chasers, grinding their lives to smooth dull blanks against the wearying routine so that the daring ones may go forth to the stars. But for you⁠—you have seen the answer.</p>
			<p>“Old blood runs thin. Thin blood runs cold. Cold blood dies. Let the walls crack.”</p>
			<p>There was a murmuring in the shadows that Ross could not hear. Then the voice again, saying a sort of goodbye.</p>
			<p>“We have had a great deal of experience with children, so we know that they must not be told too much. There is nothing more you need be told. You will go back now⁠—”</p>
			<p>Ross dared interrupt. “But our ship⁠—the others have taken it away⁠—”</p>
			<p>Again the soundless laughter. “The ship has not been taken far. Did you think we would leave you stranded here?”</p>
			<p>Ross peered hard into the shadows. But only the shadows were there, and then he and Jones were in the shadows no longer.</p>
			<p>“Ross!” Helena was hysterical with joy. Even Bernie was stammering and shaking his head incredulously. “Ross, dearest! We thought⁠—And the ship acted all <em>funny</em>, and then it landed here and there just wasn’t anybody around, and I couldn’t make it go again⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It will go now,” Ross promised. It did. They sealed ship; he took the controls; and they hung in space, looking back on a blue-green planet with a single moon.</p>
			<p>There were questions; but Ross put an end to questions. He said, “We’re going back to Halsey’s Planet. Haarland wanted an answer. We’ve found it; we’ll bring it to him. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">F.T.L.</abbr> families have kept their secret too well. No wars between the planets⁠—but stagnation worse than wars. And Haarland’s answer is this: He will be the first of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">F.T.L.</abbr> traders. He’ll build <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">F.T.L.</abbr> ships, and he’ll carelessly let their secrets be stolen. We’ll bridge the galaxy with <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">F.T.L.</abbr> transports; and we’ll pack the ships with a galaxy of crews! New genes for old; hybrid vigor for dreary decay!</p>
			<p>“Do you see it?” His voice was ringing loud; Helena’s eyes on him were adoring. “Mate Jones to Azor, Halsey’s Planet to Earth. Smash the smooth, declining curve! Cross the strains, and then breed them back. Let mankind become genetically wild again instead of rabbits isolated in their sterile hutches!”</p>
			<p>Exultantly he set up the combinations for Halsey’s Planet on the Wesley board.</p>
			<p>Helena was beside him, proud and close, as he threw in the drive.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
