<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
			<p>Their second day on the bum they accumulated a great deal of change and crowded into a telephone booth. The plan was to try to locate their starship and find out what, if anything, could be done for Sam Jones.</p>
			<p>An automatic Central conferred with an automatic Information and decided that they wanted the Captain of the Port, Baltimore Rocket Field.</p>
			<p>They got the Port Captain on the wire and Ross asked after the starship. The captain asked, “Who wan’sta know, huh?”</p>
			<p>Ross realized he had overdone it and shoved Bernie at the phone. Bernie snorted and guggled and finally got out that he jus’ wannit ta know. The captain warmed up immediately and said oh, sure, the funny-lookin’ ship, it was still there all right.</p>
			<p>“How about the fella that’s in it?”</p>
			<p>“You mean the funny-lookin’ fella? He went someplace.”</p>
			<p>“He went someplace? What place?”</p>
			<p>“Someplace. He went away, like. I din’t see him go, mister. I got plenty to do without I should watch out for every dummy that comes along.”</p>
			<p>“T’anks,” said Bernie hopelessly at Ross’s signal.</p>
			<p>They walked the street, deep in thought. Helena sobbed, “Let’s <em>leave</em> him here, Ross. I don’t like this place.”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>Bernie growled, “What’s the difference, Ross? He can get a snootful just as easy here as anywhere else⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No! It isn’t the Doc, don’t you see? But this is the place we’re looking for. All the answers we need are here; we’ve got to get them.”</p>
			<p>Bernie stepped around two tussling men on the ground, ineffectually thumping each other over a chocolate-covered confection. “Yeah,” he said shortly.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Helena said: “Isn’t that a silly way to put up a big sign like that?”</p>
			<p>Ross looked up. “My God,” he said. A gigantic metal sign with the legend, <b>Buy Smogs</b>⁠⸺⁠<b>You Can Smoke Them</b>, was being hoisted across the street ahead. The street was nominally closed to traffic by cheerfully inattentive men with red flags; a mobile boom hoist was doing the work, and quite obviously doing it wrong. The angle of the boom arm with the vertical was far too great for stability; the block-long sign was tipping the too-light body of the hoisting engine on its treads⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Ross made a flash calculation: when the sign fell, as fall it inevitably would, perhaps two hundred people who had wandered uncaringly past the warning flags would be under it.</p>
			<p>There was a sudden aura of blue light around the engine body.</p>
			<p>It tipped back to stability. The boom angle decreased, and the engine crawled forward to take up the horizontal difference.</p>
			<p>The blue light went out.</p>
			<p>Helena choked and coughed and babbled, “But Ross, it <em>couldn’t</em> have because⁠—”</p>
			<p>Ross said: “It’s them!”</p>
			<p>“Who?”</p>
			<p>Excitedly: “The people behind all this! The people who built the cities and put up the buildings and designed the machines. The people who have the answers! Come on, Bernie. I just seem to antagonize these people⁠—I want you to ask the boom operator what happened.”</p>
			<p>The boom operator cheerfully explained that nah, it was just somep’n that happened. Nah, nobody did nothin’ to make it happen. It was in case if anything went wrong, like. You know?</p>
			<p>They retired and regrouped their forces.</p>
			<p>“Foolproof machines,” Ross said slowly. “And I mean really <em>fool</em> proof. Friends, I was wrong, I admit it; I thought that those buildings and cars were something super-special, and they turned out to be just silly gimcracks. But not this blue light thing. That boom <em>had</em> to fall.”</p>
			<p>Bernie shrugged rebelliously. “So what? So they’ve got some kinds of machines you don’t have on Halsey’s Planet?”</p>
			<p>“A different order of machines, Bernie! Believe me, that blue light was something as far from any safety device I ever heard of as the starships are from oxcarts. When we find the people who designed them⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Suppose they’re all dead?”</p>
			<p>Ross winced. He said determinedly, “We’ll find them.” They returned to their begging and were recognized one day by the gray-haired profile of the party. He didn’t remember just who they were or where they were from or where he had met them, but he enthusiastically invited them to yet another party. He told them he was Hennery Matson, owner of an airline.</p>
			<p>Ross asked about accidents and blue lights. Matson jovially said some o’ his pilots talked about them things but he din’t bother his head none. Ya get these planes from the field, see, an’ they got all kinds of gadgets on them. Come on to the party!</p>
			<p>They went, because Hennery promised them another guest⁠—Sanford Eisner, who was a wealthy aircraft manufacturer. But he din’t bother his head none either; them rockets was hard to make, you had to feed the patterns, like, into the master jigs just so, and, boy!, if you got ’em in backwards it was a <em>mess</em>. Wheredja get the patterns? Look, mister, we <em>always</em> had the patterns, an’ don’t spoil the party, will ya?</p>
			<p>The party was a smasher. They all woke with headaches on Matson’s deep living room rug.</p>
			<p>“You did fine, Ross,” Helena softly assured him. “Nobody would have guessed you were any smarter than anybody else here. There wasn’t a bit of trouble.”</p>
			<p>Ross seemed to have a hiatus in his memory.</p>
			<p>The importance of the hiatus faded as time passed. There was a general move toward the automatic dispensing bar. It seemed to be regulated by a time clock; no matter what you dialed first thing in the morning, it ruthlessly poured a double rye with Worcestershire and tabasco and plopped a fair imitation of a raw egg into the concoction. It helped!</p>
			<p>Along about noon something clicked in the bar’s innards. Guests long since surfeited with the prairie oysters joyously dialed martinis and manhattans and the day’s serious drinking began.</p>
			<p>Ross fuzzily tried to trace the bar’s supply. There were nickel pipes that led Heaven knew where. Some vast depot of fermentation tanks and stills? Fed grain and cane by crawling harvest-monsters? Grain and cane planted from seed the harvest-monsters carefully culled from the crop for the plow-and-drag-and-drill-and-fertilize-and-cultivate monsters?</p>
			<p>His head was beginning to ache again. A jovial martini-drinker who had something to do with a bank⁠—a <em>bank</em>!⁠—roared, “Hey, fellas! I got a idea what we can do! Less go on over to <em>my</em> place!”</p>
			<p>So they all went, and that disposed of another day.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>It blended into a dream of irresponsible childhood. When your clothes grew shabby you helped yourself to something that fit from your host of the moment’s wardrobe. When you grew tired of one host you switched to another. They seldom remembered you from day to day, and they never asked questions.</p>
			<p>Their sex was uninhibited and most of the women were more or less pregnant most of the time. They fought and sulked and made up and giggled and drank and ate and slept. All of the men had jobs, and all of them, once in a while, would remember and stagger over to a phone and make a call to an automatic receptionist to find out if everything was going all right with their jobs. It always was. They loved their children and tolerated anything from them, except shrewd inquisitiveness which drew a fast bust in the teeth from the most indulgent daddy or adoring mommy. They loved their friends and their guests, as long as they weren’t wise guys, and tolerated anything from them⁠—as long as they weren’t wise guys.</p>
			<p>Did it last a day, a week, a month?</p>
			<p>Ross didn’t know. The only things that were really bothering Ross were, first, nobody wouldn’t tell him nothin’ about the blue lights and, second, that Bernie, he was actin’ like a wise guy.</p>
			<p>There came a morning when it ended as it had begun: on somebody’s living room rug with a headache pounding between his eyes. Helena was sobbing softly, and that wise guy, Bernie, was tugging at him.</p>
			<p>“Lea’ me alone,” ordered Captain Ross without opening his eyes. Wouldn’t let a man get his rest. What did he have to bring them along for, anyway? Should have left them where he found them, not brought them to this place Earth where they could act like a couple of wise guys and keep getting in his way every time he came close to the blue-light people, the intelligent people, the people with the answers to⁠—⁠to⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>He lay there, trying to remember what the question was.</p>
			<p>“⁠⸺⁠<em>have</em> to get him out of here,” said Helena’s voice with a touch of hysteria.</p>
			<p>“⁠⸺⁠go back and get that fellow Haarland,” said Bernie’s voice, equally tense. Ross contemplated the fragments of conversation he had caught, ignoring what the two were saying to him. Haarland, he thought fuzzily, <em>that</em> wise guy⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Bernie had him on his feet. “Leggo,” ordered Ross, but Bernie was tenacious. He stumbled along and found himself in the men’s room of the apartment. The tired-looking attendant appeared from nowhere and Bernie said something to him. The attendant rummaged in his chest and found something that Bernie put into a fizzy drink.</p>
			<p>Ross sniffed at it suspiciously. “Wassit?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Please, Ross, drink it. It’ll sober you up. We’ve got to get out of here⁠—we’re going nuts, Helena and me. This has been going on for weeks!”</p>
			<p>“Nope. Gotta find a blue light,” Ross said obstinately, swaying.</p>
			<p>“But you aren’t finding it, Ross. You aren’t doing anything except get drunk and pass out and wake up and get drunk. Come on, drink the drink.” Ross impatiently dashed it to the floor. Bernie sighed. “All right, Ross,” he said wearily. “Helena can run the ship; we’re taking off.”</p>
			<p>“Go ’head.”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, Ross. We’re going back to Halsey’s Planet, where you came from. Maybe Haarland can tell us what to do.”</p>
			<p>“Go ’head. <em>That</em> wise guy!” Ross sneered.</p>
			<p>The attendant was watching dubiously as Bernie slammed out and Ross peered at himself in a mirror. “Dime?” the attendant asked in his tired voice. Ross gave him one and went back to the party.</p>
			<p>Somehow it was not much fun.</p>
			<p>He shuffled back to the bar. The boilermaker didn’t taste too good. He set it down and glowered around the room. The party was back in swing already; Helena and Bernie were nowhere in sight. Let them go, then⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He drank, but only when he reminded himself to. This party had become a costume ball; one of the men lurched out of the room and staggered back guffawing. “Looka him!” one of the women shrieked. “He got a woman’s hat on! Horace, you get the craziest kinda ideas!”</p>
			<p>Ross glowered. He suddenly realized that, while he wasn’t exactly sober, he wasn’t drunk either. Those soreheads, they had to go and spoil the party⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>He began abruptly to get less drunk yet. Back to Halsey’s Planet, they said? Ask Haarland what to do, they said? Leave him here⁠—?</p>
			<p>He was cold sober.</p>
			<p>He found a telephone. The automatic Central checked the automatic Information and got him the Captain of the Port, Baltimore Rocket Field. The Captain was helpful and sympathetic; caught by the tense note in Ross’s voice when he told him who wannit to know, the Captain said, “Gee, buddy, if I’d of known I woulda stopped them. Stoled your ship, is that what they done? They could get arrested for that. You could call the cops an’ maybe they could do something⁠—”</p>
			<p>Ross didn’t bother to explain. He hung up.</p>
			<p>The party was no fun at all. He left it.</p>
			<p>Ross walked along the street, hating himself. He couldn’t hate Helena and Bernie; they had done the right thing. It had been his fault, all the way down the line. He’d been acting like a silly child; he’d had a job of work to do, and he let himself be sidetracked by a crazy round of drinking and parties.</p>
			<p>Of course, he told himself, something had been accomplished. Somebody had built the machines⁠—not the happy morons he had been playing with. Somebody had invented whatever it was that flared with blue light and repaired the idiot errors the morons made. Somebody, somewhere.</p>
			<p>Where?</p>
			<p>Well, he had some information. All negative. At the parties had been soldiers and politicians and industrialists and clergy and entertainers and, heaven save the mark, scientists. And none of them had had the wit to do more than push the Number Three Button when the Green Light A blinked, by rote. None of them could have given him the answer to the question that threatened to end human domination over the cosmos; none of them would have known what the words meant.</p>
			<p>Maybe⁠—Ross made himself face it⁠—maybe there was no answer. Maybe even if he found the intellects that lurked beneath the surface on this ancient planet, they could not or would not tell him what he wanted to know. Maybe the intellects didn’t exist.</p>
			<p>Maybe he was all wrong in all of his assumptions; maybe he was wasting his time. But, he told himself wryly, he had fixed it for himself that time was all he had left. He might as well waste it. He might as well go right on looking⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>A migrant party was staggering down the street toward him, a score of persons going from one host’s home to another. He crossed to avoid them. They were singing drunkenly.</p>
			<p>Ross looked at them with the distaste of the recently reformed. One of the voices raised in song caught his ear:</p>
			<p>“⁠⸺⁠bobbed his nose and dyed it rose, and kissed his lady fair, And sat her down on a cushion brown in a seven-legged chair. ‘By Jones,’ he said, ‘my shoes are red, and so’s my overcoat, And with buttons nine in a zigzag line, I’ll⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>“Doc!” Ross bellowed. “Doc Jones! For God’s sake, come over here!”</p>
			<p>They got rid of the rest of Doctor Sam Jones’s party, and Ross sobered the doctor up in an all-night restaurant. It wasn’t hard; the doctor had had plenty of practice.</p>
			<p>Ross filled him in, carefully explaining why Bernie and Helena had left him. Doc Jones filled Ross in. He didn’t have much to tell. He had come to in the ship, waited around until he got hungry, fallen into a conversation with a rocket pilot on the field⁠—and that was how <em>his</em> round of parties had begun.</p>
			<p>Like Ross, Doc, in his soberer moments, had come to the conclusion that Earth was run by person or persons unseen. He had learned little that Ross hadn’t found out or deduced. The blue lights had bothered him, too; he’d asked the pilot about it, and found out about what Ross had⁠—there appeared to be some sort of built-in safety device which kept the inevitable accidents from becoming unduly fatal. How they worked, he didn’t know⁠—</p>
			<p>But he had an idea.</p>
			<p>“It sounds a little ridiculous, I admit,” he said, embarrassed. “But I think it might work. It’s a radio program.”</p>
			<p>“A radio program?”</p>
			<p>“I said it sounded ridiculous. They call it, ‘What’s Biting You,’ and one of the fellows was telling me about it. It seems that you can appear before the panel on the program with any sort of problem, any sort at all, and they guarantee to solve it for you. There’s some sort of bond posted⁠—I don’t know much about the details, but this man assured me that the bond was only a formality; they never failed. Of course,” Doc finished, hearing his own proposal with a touch of doubt, “I don’t know whether they ever had any problem like this before, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yeah,” said Ross. “What have we got to lose?”</p>
			<p>They got into the program. It took the techniques of a doubler on an army chow line and a fair amount of brute strength, but they got to the head of the queue at the studio and wedged themselves inside. Doc came close to throttling the man who prowled through the studio audience, selecting the lucky few who would get on stage⁠—but they got on.</p>
			<p>The theme music swelled majestically around them, and a chorus crooned, “What’s Biting You⁠—Hunh?” It was repeated three times, with crashing cymbals under the “Hunh?”</p>
			<p>Ross listened to the beginning of the program and cursed himself for being persuaded into such a harebrained tactic. But, he had to admit, the program offered the only possibility in sight. The central figure was a huge, jovially grinning figure of papier-mâché, smoking a Smog and billowing smoke rings at the audience. An announcer, for some obscure reason in blackface, interviewed the disturbed derelicts who came before Smiley Smog, the papier-mâché figure, and propounded their problems to Smiley in a sort of doggerel. And in doggerel the answers came back.</p>
			<p>The first person to go up before Smiley was a woman, clearly in her last month of pregnancy. The announcer introduced her to the audience and begged for a real loud holler of hello for this poor mizzuble li’l girl. “Awright, honey,” he said. “You just step right up here an’ let ol’ Uncle Smiley take care of your troubles for you. Less go, now. What’s Bitin’ You?”</p>
			<p>“Uh,” she sobbed, “it’s like I’m gonna have a baby.”</p>
			<p>“Hoddya like that!” the announcer screamed. “She’s gonna have a <em>baby</em>! Whaddya say to that, folks?” The audience shrieked hysterically. “Awright, honey,” the announcer said. “So you’re gonna have a baby, so what’s bitin’ you about that?”</p>
			<p>“It’s my husband,” the woman sniffled. “He don’t like kids. We got eight already,” she explained. “Jack, he says if we have one more kid he’s gonna take off an’ marry somebody else.”</p>
			<p>“He’s gonna marry somebody else!” the announcer howled. “Hoddya like that, folks?” There was a tempest of boos. “Awright, now,” the announcer said, “you just sit there, honey, while I tell ol’ Uncle Smiley about this. Ya ready? Listen:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“What’s bitin’ this lady is plain to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her husband don’t want no more family!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The huge figure’s head rotated on a concealed hinge to look down on the woman. From a squawk-box deep in Smiley’s papier-mâché belly, a weary voice declaimed:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“If one more baby is your husband’s dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross him up, lady. Have twins instead!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The audience roared its approval. The announcer asked anxiously, “Ya get it? When ya get inta the hospital, like, ya jus’ tell the nurse ya want to take <em>two</em> kids home with you. See?”</p>
			<p>The grateful woman staggered away. Ross gave Doc a poisonous look.</p>
			<p>“What else is there to do?” the doctor hissed. “All right, perhaps this won’t work out⁠—but let’s try!” He half rose, and staggered against the man next to him, who was already starting toward the announcer. “Go on, Ross,” Doc hissed venomously, blocking off the other man.</p>
			<p>Ross went. What else was there to do?</p>
			<p>“What’s biting me,” he said belligerently before the announcer could put him through the preliminaries, “is simply this: L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the minus-T-over-two-N.”</p>
			<p>Dead silence in the studio. The announcer quavered, “Wh‑what was that again, buddy?”</p>
			<p>“I said,” Ross repeated firmly, “L-sub-T equals L-sub-zero e to the⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Now, wait a minute, buddy,” the announcer ordered. “We never had no stuff like that on <em>this</em> program before. Whaddya, some kind of a wise guy?”</p>
			<p>There might have been violence; the conditions were right for it. But Uncle Smiley Smog saved the day.</p>
			<p>The papier-mâché figure puffed a blinding series of smoke rings at Ross. From its molded torso, the weary voice said:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“If you’re looking for counsel sagacious and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The price is ten cents. It’s right under your eyes.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>They left the studio in a storm of animosity.</p>
			<p>“Maybe we could have collected the forfeit,” Doc said hopefully.</p>
			<p>“Maybe we could have collected some lumps,” Ross growled. “Got any more ideas?”</p>
			<p>The doctor sipped his coffee. “No,” he admitted. “I wonder⁠—No, I don’t suppose that means anything.”</p>
			<p>“That jingle? Sure it means something, Doc. It means I should have had my head examined for letting you talk me into that performance.”</p>
			<p>The doctor said rebelliously, “Maybe I’m wrong, Ross, but I don’t see that you’ve had any ideas than panned out much better.”</p>
			<p>Ross got up. “All right,” he admitted. “I’m sorry if I gave you a hard time. It’s all this coffee and all the liquor underneath it; I swear, if I ever get back to a civilized planet I’m going on a solid diet for a month.”</p>
			<p>They headed for the room marked “Gents,” Ross sullenly quiet, Doc thoughtfully quiet.</p>
			<p>Doc said reflectively, “ ‘The price is ten cents.’ Ross, could that mean a paper that we could buy on a newsstand, maybe?”</p>
			<p>“Yeah,” Ross said in irritation. “Look, Doc, don’t give it another thought. There must be some way to straighten this thing out; I’ll think of it. Let’s just make believe that whole asinine radio program never happened.” The attendant materialized and offered Ross a towel.</p>
			<p>“Dime?” he said wearily.</p>
			<p>Ross fished absently in his pocket. “The thing that bothers me, Doc,” he said, “is that I know there are intelligent people somewhere around. I even know what they’re doing, I bet. They’re doing exactly what I tried to do: acted as stupid as anybody else, or stupider. I’d make a guess,” he said, warming up, “that if we could just make a statistical analysis of the whole planet and find the absolute stupidest-seeming people of the lot, we’d⁠—”</p>
			<p>He ran out of breath all at once. His eyes bulged.</p>
			<p>He looked at the men’s-room attendant, and at the ten-cent piece in his own hand.</p>
			<p>“You!” he breathed.</p>
			<p>The attendant’s face suddenly seemed to come to life. In a voice that was abruptly richer and deeper than before, the man said: “Yes. You had to find us yourself, you know.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
